RULE 302: PROCEDURES UPON TAKING CHILD INTO CUSTODY

(a) Child Taken Into Custody Without Court Order.

When a child is taken into custody without a court order pursuant to T.C.A. Section 37-1-113(a)(3), a written protective custody order for the removal of legal custody, containing the probable cause determination required by T.C.A. Section 37-1-114(a)(2), shall issue from a magistrate within 48 hours of the taking of physical custody. The probable cause determination shall be based on a written affidavit, which may be sworn to in person or by audio-visual electronic means. If the court denies the protective custody order, the child shall be returned to the parent, guardian, or legal custodian. If the protective custody order is issued, a preliminary hearing shall be held within 72 hours, excluding non-judicial days, of the child being taken into custody.

(b) Child Taken Into Custody Pursuant to Court Order.

If a child is removed from the home of a parent, guardian or legal custodian pursuant to a protective custody order, the child shall not remain in protective custody longer than 72 hours, excluding non-judicial days, unless a preliminary hearing is held.

(c) Findings of Protective Custody Order.

A protective custody order issued pursuant to subdivision (a) or (b) shall include findings of fact supporting the probable cause determination. In addition, if the protective custody order places the child in the custody of the Department of Children's Services, the order shall include facts supporting a finding that it is contrary to the welfare of the child to remain in the home.

(d) Preliminary Hearing.

(1) Appointment of Guardian ad Litem. The court shall make every effort to appoint a guardian ad litem for the child prior to the preliminary hearing.

(2) Notification of Rights. At the beginning of the preliminary hearing, the court shall inform the parties of the purpose of the hearing and the possible consequences of the preliminary hearing, and shall inform the parties of their rights pursuant to Rule 303.

(3) Evidence. Reliable hearsay may be considered at the preliminary hearing.

(4) Required Determinations. The court, in making a decision on whether the child's continued removal from the home is warranted, shall:

(A) Determine whether probable cause exists that the child is a dependent and neglected child; and

(B) If probable cause is found, determine whether the child is subject to an immediate threat to the child's health or safety, or whether the child may be removed from the jurisdiction of the court; and

(C) Determine whether any less drastic alternative is available to the removal of the child from the custody of the parent, guardian or legal custodian.

(5) Determination at Preliminary Hearing. If the court finds that the child's continued removal from the home is not warranted, the court shall return the child to the person from whom custody was removed. If the court determines at the hearing that the child's removal is required, the court may order that the child be placed in the custody of a suitable person, persons, or agency. If the court returns the child to the person from whom custody was removed, the court may enter a temporary order setting forth conditions of the return designed to protect the rights and interests of the child and the parties pending further hearing.

(6) Waiver of Time Limit for Preliminary Hearing. The time limit for the hearing may be waived by a knowing and voluntary written waiver by the respondent. Any such waiver may be revoked at any time, at which time a preliminary hearing shall be held within the time frame outlined in T.C.A. Section 37-1-117.
