RULE 401: RATIFICATION HEARINGS

(a) Purpose of Ratification Hearing. The court shall explain on the record the purpose of the hearing.

(b) Notification of Parties. The court shall verify all parties have been properly served. In the event a party's whereabouts are unknown and the party could not be notified of the ratification hearing, the court shall determine the Department of Children's Services' reasonable efforts to notify the party of the contents of the permanency plan. If the court finds the Department has made reasonable efforts to notify the party of the contents of the plan, then the court shall proceed with the ratification of the plan.

(c) Review of Permanency Plan. The court shall review the permanency plan for each child in foster care. In reviewing the permanency plan, the court shall address the following:

(1) Whether the parties participated in the development of the plan and are in agreement with the provisions of the plan;

(2) Whether the permanency goals are appropriate, and if a concurrent goal is needed;

(3) Whether the plan includes outcomes and corresponding action steps for each permanency goal;

(4) Whether the child's placement is safe and appropriate;

(5) Whether the child's well-being is appropriately addressed through health, education and independent living skills if applicable;

(6) Whether the visitation schedule is sufficient to maintain the bond between the child and parent, and the child and siblings, who are not residing in the same placement; and

(7) Whether the statement of responsibilities for each party are reasonably related to remedying the conditions that necessitate foster care or prevent the child from safely returning home.

(d) Inclusion of Recommendations of Foster Care Review Board. If a foster care review board hearing has occurred prior to the ratification hearing, the court shall review the recommendations of the board. If the board's recommendations are in the best interest of the child, the court shall incorporate the recommendations into the plan.

(e) Evidentiary Hearing. An evidentiary hearing shall be required to ratify the plan if the following occur:

(1) The parties do not agree on the provisions of the plan;

(2) The guardian ad litem objects to the provisions of the plan; or

(3) The court determines the Department has not prioritized the outcomes and corresponding action steps for each party in the statement of responsibilities.

(f) Agreement - Modification. If the parties are in agreement to the provisions of the plan and the plan is found to be in the best interest of the child, or at the conclusion of the hearing, the court shall ratify the plan upon making fact-specific findings pursuant to T.C.A. Section 37-2-403. If the court modifies the plan, and a party is not present at the hearing, the court shall direct the Department to make reasonable efforts to notify the party of the modified provisions of the plan.

(g) Abandonment Criteria. The court shall explain on the record the law relating to abandonment and the possible consequences of termination of parental rights.

(h) Rights of Party Not Served. The court may issue a temporary order ratifying the plan. Such order shall be without prejudice to the rights of any party who has not been served with the original petition. If a party was not served, the court shall set a hearing within 60 days to determine whether the Department has conducted a diligent search.

(i) Findings - Order. The court shall make fact-specific findings pursuant to T.C.A. Section 37-2-403 and shall enter an order within 30 days of the hearing.
