             State of Tennessee
             Department of Children’s Services


Administrative Policies and Procedures: 14.11

Subject:             Child Protective Services Case File Organization, Documentation
                     and Disposition

Authority:           TCA: 37-5-105 (3); 37-5-106


Standards:           COA: PA-RPM 6.01; 6.02; PA-RPM 7, PA-CFS 9.04


Application:         To All Department of Children’s Services Child Protective Services and Special
                     Investigations Unit Employees

Policy Statement:
All child protective services case records shall be maintained in a standardized confidential manner and shall
be safeguarded from unauthorized and improper disclosure of information.

Purpose:
The TFACTS record serves as the official record and a reference tool for case DCS and private provider
Case Manager, for collection of data and preparation of required documents, forms, and assessments on
children and families served. The procedures in this policy provide guidelines for the manner in which
information is composed, maintained and expunged to ensure a systematic method for the creation of CPS
case records. Emphasis is placed on being purposeful, specific, factual, and focus on the investigative,
assessment and/or treatment process. The case record will summarize case work activity, including family
strengths, efforts to address safety and risk issues, a summary of the activities of any treatment agents
and/or family support teams. The record will also include the family’s involvement in and reaction to services
provided.

Procedures:
A. Confidentiality           1. All case records are confidential (refer to Policy 14.15, Confidentiality of
                                Child Protective Services Cases). When a hard copy is created, it must be
                                marked “CONFIDENTIAL” on the front of the folder and must be stored out of
                                public view.
                             2. When writing case recordings, staff shall be mindful of the right to
                                confidentiality and shall not include information about persons unrelated to the
                                case, except where those persons that have a direct effect on the client
                                child/youth and family (in which case, only relevant information shall be
                                documented).
                             3. When writing case recordings, without sacrificing accuracy and completeness,
                                staff shall be sensitive to the emotional well-being of the client child/youth and
                                family in the choice of terminology used (being mindful that the client
 Original Effective Date: DCS 14.11, 12/01/23
 Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                      Page 1 of 8
 Supersedes: DCS 14.16, 8/06/21
 CS-0001
 RDA SW22
 Subject: CPS Case File Organization, Documentation and Disposition                               # 14.11
                                 child/youth and family may be voluntarily or involuntarily exposed to the
                                 documentation in the future).
                             4. The release of confidential case file information must be in accordance with
                                Federal and State laws, statutes, rules and regulations, DCS policies 9.4,
                                Confidential Child-Specific Information, 9.5, Access and Release of
                                Confidential Child-Specific Information, 14.15, Confidentiality of Child
                                Protective Services Cases and DCS Health Insurance Portability and
                                Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) policies and procedures as applicable.

B. General Case              1. CPS General Case recording guidelines will include:
   Documentation for
                                a) Content - Includes a summary of the interactions, discussions, agreements,
   Case Recordings
                                   decisions, evidence of facts or issues that were discussed either face to
   Guidelines
                                   face or by other contact means. Include discussions around the use of
                                   assessments and how they are being utilized in planning. Discuss how the
                                   family is engaged in exploring all factors or elements impacting their current
                                   global situation. When applicable, indicate whether or not the child/youth
                                   had 1:1 time with the Case Manager and a brief description of that
                                   interaction. The individual conversation with the child(ren) always includes
                                   discussion and assessment of safety. Specifically address the strengths
                                   and needs identified in all family case plans. Whatever purpose of contact
                                   was identified (i.e., safety, permanency, well-being or service planning,
                                   etc.), the narrative needs to reflect what was discussed and how it relates to
                                   the long term view of the family case and/or in the resolution of the issues
                                   or concerns that brought them to the attention of the Department.
                                b) Observation–describe in observable/measurable terms: individual
                                   behaviors witnessed; observations regarding the appearance of the children
                                   in relation to appropriate dress for current conditions, whether or not they
                                   appear well-nourished, any evidence of developmental delays, illness or
                                   need for medical care; the interactions among parties present including
                                   interaction with Case Manager; significant environmental factors; safety and
                                   risk factors including observed strengths/needs; and the family’s response
                                   to interventions or services being implemented.
                                c) Next Steps - State what is to be done next as a result of this contact, or as
                                   a natural progression of the case management process.
                                d) Transfer summary: details case activity if case is to be transitioned.
                                e) Closing summary: a narrative description of reason for opening, current
                                   safety, risk and well-being status of child and family, classification decision
                                   and the justification, the case plan including any referrals made and the
                                   family’s reaction to case closure that forms the basis of the CPS Case
                                   Summary and Classification Decision of Child Abuse/Neglect Referral,
                                   CS-0740 on the appropriate screens in TFACTS.
                             Note: When substantiating an allegation, the Work Aid 1 definition of that
                                   allegation is included in case recordings such as a CPIT and/or Notation.


 Original Effective Date: DCS 14.11, 12/01/23
 Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                      Page 2 of 8
 Supersedes: DCS 14.16, 8/06/21
 CS-0001
 RDA SW22
 Subject: CPS Case File Organization, Documentation and Disposition                               # 14.11
                             2. Case recordings must:
                                     Be relevant, reliable and written in clear and complete sentences, and
                                     Not include slang language or subjective/personal value judgments.
                             3. Abbreviations and acronyms used must be commonly understood and
                                acceptable.
                             4. E-mails will not be pasted directly into case recordings. Staff will note in the
                                narrative section that contact was made with an individual through email and
                                noting only information pertaining to the case. Discussion of topics
                                unrelated to the case will not be contained within the narrative.
                             5. Handwritten notes will not be maintained as part of the case record.
                             Note: Documentation is entered throughout the life of the case.
                                   Documentation may be added after a case is closed upon consultation
                                   with a CPS supervisor when there is a legitimate business reason including
                                   but not limited to receipt of additional records from an external partner,
                                   documentation of case tasks that were completed but not timely entered,
                                   post closure reviews or court hearings that took place after the case was
                                   closed.

C. Case Record               TFACTS serves as the official DCS record. Documents or information including
   Composition               case recordings, assessments and service plans that are located in TFACTS are
                             not to be printed for the purpose of sharing with other program areas or case
                             records. Additional records not automated by TFACTS are to be uploaded into
                             the TFACTS case record as technology allows. Additional information, pertinent
                             to the record but not automated by TFACTS, is to be uploaded into the TFACTS
                             case record as technology allows. Information relative to case evidence that
                             cannot be uploaded into the TFACTS case record is maintained in a
                             supplementary hard copy record (i.e.; DVDs, large medical records, birth
                             certificates).
                             Composition for any created hard copy files is maintained per the following
                             guidelines:
                              1. Each family shall have one (1) record.
                              2. All documents will be filed in a classification folder with two (2) dividers and
                                 the case record contents will be filed according to CS-0726, Child
                                 Protective/Non-Custodial Case File Documentation and Organization
                                 Checklist. The CPS tab pages will be printed on blue copy paper. The Family
                                 Crisis Intervention Program (FCIP) tab pages will be printed on yellow copy
                                 paper.
                              3. The inside cover of each folder will be reserved for the Records Disposition
                                 Authority (RDA) information to be recorded.
                              4. The case record contents including forms will be filed in ascending ( ) order
                                 (most recent on top).


 Original Effective Date: DCS 14.11, 12/01/23
 Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                      Page 3 of 8
 Supersedes: DCS 14.16, 8/06/21
 CS-0001
 RDA SW22
 Subject: CPS Case File Organization, Documentation and Disposition                                # 14.11
                              5. The case record will be labeled on the tab portion of the folder with the
                                 mother’s or primary caregiver’s last name listed first separated by a comma
                                 followed by the mother’s or primary caregiver’s first name.

                             1. Case Summary (Case summary of all contacts, dates of contacts and activities
D. Case Recording
   Guidelines-                  completed in one recording)
   Investigation and
   Assessment-                   a) Family/Household Composition:
   Monthly Summary
   Documentation                         Name(s), DOB(s), relationships
                                         Address
                                         Phone number(s)
                                         Email
                                         Non-custodial parent name, DOB, relationship
                                         Non-custodial parent address
                                         Non-custodial parent phone number
                                         Non-custodial parent email
                                b) Engagement reflected in the following interviews:
                                      Caretaker interview(s)
                                      Sibling interview(s)
                                      Home Visit(s)
                                      Referent Contact including contact to gather more information
                             2. If other issues outside of the initial allegation were identified, how did the Case
                                Manager address these issues
                             3. Notice to juvenile court at assignment/classification and notice to District
                                Attorney/CPIT on severe abuse, per local protocols.
                             4. A separate case recording is entered for:
                                         Initial Alleged Child Victim (ACV) contacts;
                                         Good Faith Efforts;
                                         Subsequent contacts with ACV(s);
                                         CPIT (if applicable); and
                                         Administrative Reviews by Supervisor as a separate case recording
                                          (Refer to DCS Policy 4.4, Performance and Case Supervision
                                          Practice Guidelines and Criteria).

                             5. The CS-0740/Summary Tab serves as the Closing Summary.



 Original Effective Date: DCS 14.11, 12/01/23
 Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                       Page 4 of 8
 Supersedes: DCS 14.16, 8/06/21
 CS-0001
 RDA SW22
 Subject: CPS Case File Organization, Documentation and Disposition                              # 14.11


                             6. Timeframes for entry of case recordings are as follows:
                                 a) Face to Face contacts with the ACV are entered into TFACTS within ten
                                    (10) business days of the contact.
                                 b) Case Summaries are entered by the end of the calendar month during
                                    which the contacts and activities took place.
                                 c) All other case recordings, including contacts and events taking place in a
                                    calendar month and not included in the Case Summary, are entered within
                                    thirty (30) calendar days of the contact or event.

E. Extended Case             1. The following CPS cases require extended documentation:
   Recording
                                      Cases with allegations of Child Death/Near Death;
   Guidelines-
   Investigation and                  Cases with any allegation being Substantiated;
   Assessment                         Cases with a classification of Services Needed, Court Ordered; and/or
                                      Court action resulting in removal into state custody or a transfer of
                                       custody to a third party.
                             2. Extended Documentation includes the following:
                                 a) A description of each case contact must be made in the case record.
                                 b) Face to Face contacts with the ACV are entered into TFACTS within ten
                                    (10) business days of the contact.
                             3. Each contact will be documented in TFACTS case recordings within thirty (30)
                                days from the date of the contact.
                             4. The format of case recordings may include the following:
                                      The full date (month, day, year) and time of contact;
                                      Contact Type;
                                      Contact Method;
                                      Name of person making the contact (DCS employee);
                                      Names of persons present during the contact;
                                      Summary of facts and issues discussed;
                                      Observations of safety/risk factors including strengths and needs;
                                      Observations of the child/family; and
                                      List of the evidence that supports the facts.




 Original Effective Date: DCS 14.11, 12/01/23
 Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                     Page 5 of 8
 Supersedes: DCS 14.16, 8/06/21
 CS-0001
 RDA SW22
 Subject: CPS Case File Organization, Documentation and Disposition                                # 14.11
                              5. The narrative of case recordings includes:
                                      The name of person contacted and relationship to child;
                                      Summary of facts and issues discussed;
                                      Observations of safety/risk factors including strengths and needs;
                                      Observations of the child/family; and
                                      List of the evidence that supports the facts.
                                      Statements of future plan, actions or next steps.
                             Note: Documentation content for case recordings for Child Protective Services
                                   case files are in accordance with OCS Quality Documentation Guide.

F. Case Recording             This documentation is acceptable for cases classified as AUPU, No Services
  Guidelines-                 Needed, Services Recommended and Services Needed.
  Investigation and
  Assessment-
                               Note: This should not be used for Child Death, Preliminary Near Death, any
  Condensed
  Documentation                      substantiated or court action case.
                              1. A separate case recording is entered for:
                                     Initial Alleged Child Victim (ACV) contacts;
                                     Good Faith Efforts;
                                     Subsequent contacts with ACV(s);
                                     CPIT (if applicable); and
                                     Administrative Reviews (Refer to Policy 4.4, Performance and Case
                                       Supervision Practice Guidelines and Criteria).
                                      Family/Household Composition:
                                        Name(s), DOB(s), relationship(s)
                                        Address
                                        Phone number(s)
                                        Email
                                        Non-custodial parent name, DOB, relationship
                                        Non-custodial parent address
                                        Non-custodial parent phone number
                                        Non-custodial parent email

                              2. All other documentation is completed on the CS-0740 TFACTS Summary Tab
                                 to include:
                                  a) A summary of the child(ren) interviews to include information about the
                                     allegations, their health, safety, school, services, visitation with
                                     noncustodial parent (if applicable), discipline, independent living/skills and
                                     an observation of their appearance. This can include sibling information if
                                     they were not ACV’s. A brief description about the home visit, conditions,
 Original Effective Date: DCS 14.11, 12/01/23
 Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                       Page 6 of 8
 Supersedes: DCS 14.16, 8/06/21
 CS-0001
 RDA SW22
 Subject: CPS Case File Organization, Documentation and Disposition                                # 14.11
                                      and safe sleep (if applicable).
                                  b) A summary of any collateral contacts, records reviewed, or additional
                                     information obtained during the case. This could be the information
                                     obtained from the parent/caretaker if they are not the perpetrator. Be sure
                                     to include information to support the global assessment of the household
                                     and the allegations.
                                  c) A summary of the perpetrators report of the incident.
                                  d) A brief summary of why DCS received a report of harm- does not need to
                                     be a cut and paste of the referral.
                                  e) A summary of the findings of the interviews and investigation to support,
                                     or oppose the allegations, any services in place, services offered,
                                     presentation to CPIT (if applicable). If transferring to FSS, note that. This
                                     section must include a statement for notice to Juvenile Court per local
                                     practice for case assignment and classification/closure.

G. Supervisory                When supervisory staff gives directions to case management staff regarding a
   Responsibility             specific action to be taken (or not taken) related to a case, that conversation will
                              be entered by the supervisor in TFACTS per DCS Policy 4.4, Performance and
                              Case Supervision Practice Guidelines and Criteria.

H. Contact with DCS          1. Case consultation between DCS staff and DCS Legal Counsel may be
   Legal Counsel                documented on the appropriate screens or case recordings in TFACTS but
                                must be limited only to the date, time, person(s) contacted, and purpose of
                                contact.
                             2. Specific content of the discussion is considered attorney-client privilege and
                                should not be included in the case notes.

I. Identification of         Closed CPS records will be destroyed in accordance with the appropriate Records
  Closed Files               Disposition Authority (RDA):
                              RDA 2993-Closed Child Safety Case Management Files

J. Methods of Record         Approved methods for destroying Child Protective Services confidential paper
   Disposal                  record information will be as outlined in DCS policy 9.4, Confidential Child-
                             Specific Information.

K. Disposal                  Form GS-0989, Certificate of Record Destruction, must be completed in
   Documentation             accordance with DCS Policy 9.4, Confidential Child-Specific Information.


Forms:                  CS-0726, Child Protective Services/Non-Custodial Case File Documentation and
                        Organization Checklist
                        GS-0989, Certificate of Record Destruction (non-DCS form)
                        CS-0740, Child Protective Services Case Summary and Classification Decision
 Original Effective Date: DCS 14.11, 12/01/23
 Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                       Page 7 of 8
 Supersedes: DCS 14.16, 8/06/21
 CS-0001
 RDA SW22
 Subject: CPS Case File Organization, Documentation and Disposition                          # 14.11
                        of Child Abuse/Neglect Referral


Collateral              9.4, Confidential Child-Specific Information
documents:              9.5, Access and Release of Confidential Child-Specific Information
                        14.15, Confidentiality of Child Protective Services Cases
                        OCS Quality Documentation Guide


Glossary:
Term                    Definition
Expunge:                To destroy or mark for deletion.




 Original Effective Date: DCS 14.11, 12/01/23
 Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                Page 8 of 8
 Supersedes: DCS 14.16, 8/06/21
 CS-0001
 RDA SW22
