           State of Tennessee
           Department of Children’s Services


Administrative Policies and Procedures: 14.28

Subject:            Resource Linkage

Standards:          COA: PA-CFS 1, PA-CFS 3, PA-CFS 8.01


Application: To All Department of Children’s Services staff, Child Abuse Hotline Employees, and
                    Resource Linkage Coordinators

Policy Statement:
The Department of Children’s Services utilizes Resource Linkage (RL) to safeguard and enhance the welfare
of children, preserve family life, prevent harm and abuse to children by strengthening the ability of families to
parent, provide for and protect their children effectively using available community-based, faith-based, and
public and private resources and services. By utilizing and building existing strengths within the communities
and families, RL can support all families in providing a healthy, safe and loving environment for their children.

Purpose:
When a determination is made that a case meets the criteria for RL services, the Department collaborates
with public and private agencies to refer families to available resources that meet their needs. The short term
intervention services provided may assist the family in their efforts to prevent further DCS involvement by
establishing self-sufficiency.

Procedures:
A. Screening to              1. Child Abuse Hotline (CAH) and Reader ensures that:
   Resource Linkage
                                a) The case does not meet Child Protective Services (CPS) criteria for
                                   intervention as outlined in DCS Policy 14.1, Child Abuse Hotline,
                                b) Sufficient location information exists for family as outlined in Work Aid 6,
                                   Child Abuse Hotline.
                                c) Sufficient information is provided regarding the nature of the referral.
                             2. Criteria for Resource Linkage (RL) Includes short-term (30 days) intervention
                                directly related to child and family needs to reduce the risk of abuse or neglect.
                                Assistance may include, but not limited to be provided in the form of:
                                     Housing necessities:
                                       • Rental assistance
                                       • General housing information
                                       • Utilities:
                                       • Overdue utility bills

Original Effective Date: 02/01/12
Current Effective Date: 7/01/21                                                                        Page 1 of 5
Supersedes: 10/21/20
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject Resource Linkage                                                                              14.28
                                      • Deposit, reconnect fee
                                     Clothing
                                     Food
                                     Furniture (refer to Protocol for Safe Sleep Education and Delivery of
                                      Safe Sleep Furniture for additional safety information, if applicable); or
                                      • Cribs, child beds, pack ‘n play
                                      • Appliances
                                     Services
                                      • Family counseling
                                      • Admission to residential
                                      • Lice treatments
                                      • General services information
                                      • Extermination
                                      • Transportation services
                                      • School Supplies
                             3. If the RL Coordinator receives a case that does not meet criteria for RL or is
                                determined to meet criteria for CPS or FSS, the RL Coordinator meets with the
                                RL supervisor to discuss case closure and/or referral to the appropriate
                                program. If there are concerns of abuse/neglect, the TL submits the case to
                                their supervisor for Administrative Closure and calls in a new report to the Child
                                Abuse Hotline.
                             4. When there is an open CPS or FSS case and a resource linkage referral is
                                screened in through the CAH, the new RL case is absorbed by the CPS or FSS
                                program and RL assists as needed and provides consultation. RL enters
                                documentation in the Family Case (refer to section D).
                             5. When there is an open RL case and abuse or neglect allegations are found by
                                RL worker, the RL consults with supervisor and makes a referral to the CAH.

                             6. When there is an open RL case and abuse or neglect allegations are screened
                                through the CAH, the CPS and the RL supervisors discuss the allegations and
                                jointly decide if it is appropriate for two (2) separate cases (CPS and RL) to
                                remain open.

                                     If RL support is warranted, the RL case remains open for the duration of
                                      the RL service provision.

                             7. The reporter may be notified whether the report is screened out or assigned by
                                e-mail, mail, or the Child Abuse Reporting and Tracking (CARAT) website.


Original Effective Date: 02/01/12
Current Effective Date: 7/01/21                                                                       Page 2 of 5
Supersedes: 14.28, 10/21/20
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject Resource Linkage                                                                              14.28

                            1. Upon receipt of a RL request, RL Staff:
B. Contact with Family
   and Service                       Ensure that the referral is made to the Child Abuse Hotline (CAH) in
   Providers                          order to have the referral assigned to the RL track when it meets criteria;
                                     Contact the family by a telephone call, face-to-face, or by written
                                      correspondence (i.e., formal letter on DCS letterhead, etc.);
                                     Contact with families and/or case managers occur within three (3)
                                      business days from the date of the referral/request; and
                                     Contact Community Resources, including Community Advisory Board
                                      (CAB) members for possible assistance.

                             2. When the RLC and supervisor determine that a face to face is necessary:
                                A face to face contact takes place between a DCS worker, the caretaker and/or
                                the child/children. A face to face takes place in the home or in another
                                community location.
                             3. A face to face is required when:
                                     There is a Case Service Request entered for the family by RLC;
                                     RL intervention provides services beyond 30 days from the day of
                                      referral/request; or
                                     The supervisor determines a face to face is necessary.
                              Note: Face to Face contacts with the children are entered into TFACTS within ten
                                    (10) business days of the contact.



C. Community                 1. RL staff are responsible for the development and support of independent
   Advisory Boards              CAB’s, which includes:
   (CABs)
                                     Identifying mandated and desired members;
   Responsibilities
                                     Serving as a liaison between DCS, the CAB’s and other community
                                      supports;
                                     Updating CAB’s on the needs and interests of DCS that improve
                                      practice with children and families;
                                     Providing the level of support needed to help CAB’s sustain and prioritize
                                      agendas to meet legislative requirements; and
                                     Assisting in the development of community services and resources.

                             2. RL staff ensures that he/she or a DCS designee attends each CAB meeting.
                             3. RL staff obtain copies of the minutes from the CAB meetings, and uploads the
                                minutes to the Department and Regional drives, monthly.


Original Effective Date: 02/01/12
Current Effective Date: 7/01/21                                                                       Page 3 of 5
Supersedes: 14.28, 10/21/20
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject Resource Linkage                                                                                14.28
                             4. RL staff provides assistance with utilizing the CAB toolkit.
                             5. If RL identifies barriers in communication within the CAB, they will partner with
                                regional supervision to work through CAB issues or needs. Central Office
                                Program staff may be consulted for additional assistance.

D. Entry of Tasks into       1. RL staff enters the following information into the family case under the case
   TFACTS                       recordings tab for the assigned RL case. If RL is providing assistance on an
                                open DCS case, RL enters notes in the family case for the assigned case.
                                       Dates of contact and/or attempts to contact the family;
                                       Contact type with the family; and
                                       Content of contacts, including service needs discussed and provided.
                             2. Contacts, content, and outcomes may be summarized into one entry.
                             3. All participants in the case are established, and the case is linked to a family
                                case ID.
                             4. The RL staff completes the Resource Linkage Monthly Report and submits
                                monthly.
                            5. RL staff adheres to documentation standards as outlined in DCS Policy 31.14,
                               Documentation of TFACTS Case Recordings when entering all case activities
                               beyond face to face contacts with children.

E. Closure                   1. A documentation summary is created to include:
                                       Assistance requested and assistance provided; and
                                       Tasks and efforts made throughout the case .
                             2. The RL supervisor approves the case for closure within thirty (30) days from the
                                date of the referral/request.
                             3. The Supervisor enters a case consultation within the first thirty (30) days of
                                opening the RL case and every thirty (30) days for the life of the case.

                                    A case consultation should consist of:
                                       Summarizing any service provisions and current status of any services
                                        that were discussed, accepted or refused by the family;
                                       Providing case direction to the worker with regards to next steps and
                                        planning, and anticipated closure;
                                       Determining if the case should remain open or needs to be referred to
                                        another program; and
                                       Justification for the case remaining open beyond thirty (30) days..




Original Effective Date: 02/01/12
Current Effective Date: 7/01/21                                                                        Page 4 of 5
Supersedes: 14.28, 10/21/20
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject Resource Linkage                                                                       14.28

Forms:                CS 0764, Resource Linkage Assistance Request Form



Collateral            Resource Linkage Pricing Guide (program use only)
documents:            Protocol for Safe Sleep Education and Delivery of Safe Sleep Furniture
                       CAB Toolkit
                       Resource Linkage Work Aid (program use only)




Original Effective Date: 02/01/12
Current Effective Date: 7/01/21                                                                Page 5 of 5
Supersedes: 14.28, 10/21/20
CS-0001
RDA SW22
