                     State of Tennessee
                     Department of Children’s Services

Administrative Policies and Procedures: 14.6

Subject:            Child Protective Services Case Tasks and Responsibilities

Authority:          TCA 37-1-401 et seq; 37-1-601et seq; 37-5-105 (3); 37-5-106; 37-5-107; 37-1-413; 39-13-
                    301; 39-13-309; 37-1-413

Standards:          COA: PA-CFS 2.02, PA-CFS 3, PA-CFS 5, PA-CFS 6, PA-CFS 7, PA-CFS 8, PA-CFS 9,
                    PA-CFS 10, PA-CFS 11, PA-CFS 12, PA-CFS 33.10

Application: All Department of Children’s Services Child Protective Services Employees and Special
                    Investigations Unit Employees

Policy Statement:
A Child Protective Services (CPS) investigation case must be classified within thirty (30) calendar days of the
Child Abuse Hotline (CAH) receiving a report. An investigation is concluded within sixty (60) calendar days
with a decision to close the case, provide or refer to community services or transition to a Family Service Case
Manager (FSW) prior to day 60 for investigation track or day 90 for assessment track.

Purpose:
To ensure that CPS cases are properly classified and closed by completing critical investigative tasks,
maximizing resources, and making consistent decisions to ensure the safety of the child.

Procedures:
A. Investigative
                            The following investigative responsibilities are completed within timeframes in DCS
   responsibilities
                            Policy 14.5, Child Protective Services Multiple Response System from the CAH
                            receiving the report and prior to case closure (refer to Child Protective Services
                            Tasks Manual).
                             1. Required Contacts:
                                 a) Make contact with the hospital within twenty-four (24) hours of the intake if
                                    alleged child victim (ACV) is hospitalized per the Protocol for Working with
                                    Hospitals.
                                 b) Meet priority response within the assigned timeframe (refer to Section D of
                                    DCS Policy 14.2, Screening, Priority Response and Assignment of Child
                                    Protective Services Cases). The CPS investigator conducts the required
                                    Good Faith Efforts (GFE) to locate the ACV and family and document those
                                    efforts in TFACTS (refer to DCS Policy 14.4, CPS: Locating the Child and
                                    Family).
                             Note: When DCS is unable to locate a child/family through GFE and there is a
                                   reason to believe that the child/family has relocated to another country, refer to


    Original Effective Date: 14.6, 12/01/23
    Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                      Page 1 of 12
    Supersedes: DCS: 14.7, 12/21/21
    CS-0001
    RDA SW22
Subject: Child Protective Services Case Tasks and Responsibilities                                14.6
                                  Safety Notice: International Assistance Locating Children or Families for
                                  additional options.
                             c) Convene the Child Protective Investigative Team (CPIT) (refer to Section B of
                                DCS Policy 14.7, Multi-Disciplinary Team: Child Protection Investigation
                                Team) when:
                                   The CAH identifies the allegation to be severe abuse.
                                   Additional information is gathered during the investigation to identify the
                                    allegation(s) as severe abuse.

                             d) Review DCS history for all listed participants and other external historical and
                                case relevant documents, as available. A discussion of the history impacting
                                the current case should be noted in the Administrative Review and does not
                                require a list of all prior case numbers/dates.

                             e) Refer to Safety Notice: Conducting an Efficient and Effective History
                                Search for additional information. CPS Case Manager enters a case
                                recording regarding information pertinent to the current case.

                          2. Conduct interviews:

                             a) Interview/observation of the ACV: a minimum of one (1) face to face contact
                                with the ACV is required each calendar month.
                                   All ACV contacts must be entered in the system within 10 business days
                                    of the contact.
                             b) Interview with non-offending parent or caregiver;
                             c) Interview/observe all other children with custodian permission, who reside in
                                the home;
                             d) Interview/observe all other persons living in the home;
                             e) Interview the Alleged Perpetrator (AP), even if the ACV does not disclose
                                abuse/neglect,
                             f)   Interview/contact any potential witnesses to the incident/concerns;
                             g) Interview/contact any collateral contacts for the children/family; and
                             h) Interview the non-custodial parent, at minimum via phone, or document efforts
                                to locate.

                                   When conducting interviews, refer to Safety Notice: Beyond the Minimal
                                    Facts Interview and Safety Notice: Domestic Violence: Facts and
                                    Strategies for Response, for additional information.
                             i) Follow protocols for notification of all relevant entities and licensing facilities of
                                case initiation and closure is this pertaining to SIU.




Original Effective Date: 14.6, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                          Page 2 of 12
Supersedes: DCS 14.7, 12/21/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Child Protective Services Case Tasks and Responsibilities                           14.6
                         3. Conduct Case Tasks:

                             a) Conduct an initial home visit.
                             b) Conduct home visits one (1) time per month.
                             c) Assigned Case Manager should document notification of case assignment to
                                the local Juvenile Court for case assignment and closure, per local practice.
                             d) Document notice to District Attorney/Law Enforcement per local practice for
                                severe abuse cases.
                             e) Conduct required background checks on all household members:
                                   National Sex Offender Registry
                                   Tennessee Sex Offender Registry
                                   DCS history search (refer to Safety Notice: Conducting an Efficient and
                                    Effective History Search).

                             f)   Additional background checks that can be completed if information in the case
                                  indicates there is cause for concern:
                                   Felony Offender Registry
                                   Department of Health Abuse Registry
                                   Drug Offender Registry
                                   Local Criminal History

                             g) Complete assessment tools per timeframes in Protocol for Completion of
                                the Family Advocacy and Support Tool (FAST).
                             h)   Contact referent, when identified.
                             i)    Request and arrange medical exams or psychological evaluations, if
                                   applicable.
                             j)    Administrative Reviews (refer to DCS Policy 4.4 Performance and Case
                                   Supervision Practice Guidelines and Criteria).
                             k)    Complete other CPS investigative activities or tasks, as necessary.
                             l)    Consult with Regional General Counsel (RGC) when required (refer to DCS
                                   Policy 14.13, Non-Custodial Immediate Protection Agreements and DCS
                                   Policy 14.14, Removal: Safety and Permanency Considerations);
                             m) Conduct Child and Family Team Meeting (CFTM) (refer to the DCS Child
                                and Family Team Meeting Guide);
                             n)    Develop service plans, such as the Family Permanency Plan (FPP) or Plan
                                   of Safe Care;
                                    Maintain regular contact, at least once a month, with community partners
                                     or service providers for status updates (refer to the Protocol for
                                     Working with Hospitals).


Original Effective Date: 14.6, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                     Page 3 of 12
Supersedes: DCS 14.7, 12/21/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
   Subject: Child Protective Services Case Tasks and Responsibilities                           14.6

                              o)     Complete required forms:
                                       CS-0050, Case Intake Packet Documents and Native American
                                        Heritage Verification
                                       CS-0789, Release of information TennCare Eligibility Authorization
                                        (one per child in the home and one for each parent/adult, if they have
                                        TennCare).

                                p)    Complete optional forms as needed:
                                       CS-0559, Authorization for Release of Information and HIPAA
                                        Protected Health Information To or From DCS and Notification of
                                        Release (one (1) for each client and provider);
                                       CS-0701, Immediate Protection Agreement (at least three (3) copies,
                                        for DCS, placement and parent)
                                       CS-0774, Contact Sheet for Genogram
                                       CS-1209, Safe Sleep Assessment (if child is under one (1) year)
                                       CS-0827, Non-Custodial Consent for Transportation
                                q)    Refer to the Tennessee Early Intervention Services (TEIS) for substantiated
                                      cases involving children ages three (3) and under. Children under the age of
                                      three (3) who are involved in all other cases may be referred to TEIS.
                                       https://stateoftennessee-cvlyz.formstack.com/forms/teis_referral
                             Note: If one (1) or more investigative responsibilities cannot be completed within
                                   the established times and prior to case closure, justification detailing why the
                                   responsibility could not be completed must be documented in TFACTS as an
                                   Administrative Review and Team Leader approval must be provided.
                                r)    Documentation of tasks and uploading of documents are to be entered per
                                      DCS Policy 14.11, Child Protective Services Case File Organization,
                                      Documentation and Disposition and the OCS Quality Documentation
                                      Guide, prior to case closure.

B. New Referrals on        When an additional allegation(s) has been reported and added to an already open
  Open Cases               case the CPS Case Manager conducts investigative activities in accordance with this
                           policy in an effort to address the additional concerns. The CPS Case Manager
                           documents the addition of the new allegation(s) in TFACTS and consults with the
                           Team Leader (TL) regarding next steps (refer to DCS Policy 14.2, Screening,
                           Priority Response and Assignment of Child Protective Services Cases).

C. Classification          Within thirty (30) calendar days from the intake date, allegations as defined in Work
                           Aid 1: CPS Categories and Definitions of Abuse/Neglect, are classified at the
                           discretion of DCS according to one of the following options:
                            1. CPS Investigative Track Classifications
                           Exceptions to classifying cases within thirty (30) calendar days may include child
                           death investigations awaiting an autopsy report and CPS investigations which are
                           marked as “severe” and they cannot be classified by day 30 due to outstanding
                           investigative tasks which would impact the classification.

   Original Effective Date: 14.6, 12/01/23
   Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                    Page 4 of 12
   Supersedes: DCS 14.7, 12/21/21
   CS-0001
   RDA SW22
Subject: Child Protective Services Case Tasks and Responsibilities                            14.6


                             a) Allegation Substantiated, Perpetrator Substantiated
                                 This classification is applicable when there is a preponderance of evidence to
                                 validate an allegation occurred, occurred and the AP identified in the report is
                                 found to be responsible for the alleged acts.
                             b) Allegation Substantiated, Perpetrator Unsubstantiated
                                 This classification is applicable when there is a preponderance of evidence to
                                 validate an allegation occurred, however, there is insufficient evidence to
                                 substantiate the identified AP.
                             c) Allegation Substantiated, Perpetrator Unknown
                                 This classification is applicable when there is a preponderance of evidence to
                                 support that an allegation of abuse or neglect occurred, however, an AP
                                 cannot be identified.
                             d) Allegation Unsubstantiated, Perpetrator Unsubstantiated
                                  This classification is applicable when there is not a preponderance of
                                  evidence to support the allegation occurred and the AP identified in the report
                                  was not found to be responsible for any abuse or neglect.
                             e) Allegation Unsubstantiated, Child with Sexual Behavior Problems
                                 This classification is applicable when there is sufficient information and
                                 evidence which supports sexual contact did occur with the ACV, however the
                                 AP is twelve (12) years old or younger. This may also include children under
                                 age eighteen (18) who clinically function at an age of twelve (12) or younger
                                 (due to an intellectual or development disability).
                            Note: Approval to classify a case as unable to complete must be given by the
                                  Child Protective Services Director or designee.
                            Note: CPS staff are to consult with legal when the family has been located but is
                                  unwilling to cooperate for possible court action prior to using this
                                  classification.
                            Note: For all substantiated perpetrators, notification of due process will be sent
                                  upon classification per the Protocol for Notification of Substantiated
                                  Perpetrators.
                        2. CPS Assessment Track Classifications:
                             a) No Services Needed – An assessment is completed and no risk or service
                                needs are identified. There are no concerns regarding the safety of the
                                child(ren).
                            b) Services Recommended- There is a need for services, but there is no
                               immediate threat of harm to the safety of the child or family. These
                               encouraged and voluntary services may be new services or existing services
                               the family is recommended to continue. There is a minimum of one (1) face
                               to face contact with the ACV each calendar month. There is a minimum of
                               one (1) monthly contact with each parent/caretaker(s). It is at the discretion


Original Effective Date: 14.6, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                      Page 5 of 12
Supersedes: DCS 14.7, 12/21/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Child Protective Services Case Tasks and Responsibilities                             14.6
                                 of the Team Leader to determine if the case circumstances warrant
                                 increasing the face-to-face contacts.
                            c) Services Needed- There is an immediate threat of harm, and without services,
                               the safety of the child or family is at question. Safety issues and future risk of
                               harm are so great that the agency provides services.
                           Note: If the family refuses the needed services, and after consult with a Team
                                 Leader and Regional Legal Counsel (RGC)/ designee, it is determined the
                                 concern of safety or risk, does not warrant court involvement, no further
                                 action to seek service compliance is necessary, and the case should be
                                 prepared for closure with documentation to reflect the decision.
                            d)     Services Needed, Court Ordered- There is an immediate threat of harm, a
                                   need of services, and/or court involvement is warranted.
                                    The Case Manager and Team Leader consult to determine risk/safety
                                     factors, service needs, FAST results, and consult with regional legal
                                     counsel (RGC)/ designee regarding what court involvement to pursue.
                                    Upon receipt of a verbal or written court order, face-to-face contact is
                                     made with the ACV within the first five (5) business days. There is a
                                     minimum of one (1) monthly contact with each parent/caretaker(s).
                                    If the Court does not support the recommendation and services are not
                                     ordered, there is consultation with the TL and RGC or designee to
                                     consider other options before closure.
                           Note: If an assessment case demonstrates that a preponderance of the evidence
                                 indicates that a child has been harmed, it is appropriate to consider changing
                                 the track of the case, substantiating an allegation and/or the perpetrator.

                          3. Other Classifications- Both classifications below require review/approval from
                             the Child Protective Services Regional Director/Designee.
                              a)     Unable to Complete
                                      This classification is applicable when the ACV or family are unable to be
                                       located after GFEs have been completed (refer to DCS Policy 14.4,
                                       CPS: Locating the Child and Family); or
                                      The incident occurred in another state and DCS participated in
                                       investigative activities or offered services, but was unable to gather
                                       sufficient evidence to formally classify the allegation(s). When there is
                                       sufficient evidence to formally classify the allegation, the CPS Case
                                       Manager refers to the appropriate finding above.
                        Note: CPS Case Managers are to consult with legal when the family has been
                              located but is unwilling to cooperate for possible court action prior to using this
                              classification.
                        4. Administrative Closure this should be section b) to match a) above as part of
                           Section 3.
                             a) This classification is applicable when a courtesy interview(s) has been
                                conducted (refer to Work Aid 5: CPS Courtesy Requests); or

Original Effective Date: 14.6, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                       Page 6 of 12
Supersedes: DCS 14.7, 12/21/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
   Subject: Child Protective Services Case Tasks and Responsibilities                           14.6
                                b) There are other circumstances which are approved at the discretion of the
                                   Child Protective Services Director, or designee.


                                Note: Cases classified as Unable to Complete or Administrative Closure that are
                                      marked severe, must be presented to CPIT, signing the CS-0561, prior to
                                      closure and have a completed Safety Assessment based on the
                                      information in the referral.

D. Case Transition         Case transition occurs when it is determined that a service need is identified for a
                           non-custodial case, services are court ordered, or when custodial services are
                           required (refer to Child Protective Services Tasks Manual).
                                      Complete form: CS-0498, Family Intervention Services Application
                                       and submit via email to the FSS Team Leader.

E. Case Closure            To close a CPS investigation, all CPS investigative responsibilities referred to in
                           section A of this policy must be completed, in addition to the following tasks within
                           established timeframes:
                               a) Case recordings must be entered within thirty (30) calendar days of completing
                                  the investigative activity, unless otherwise directed by policy, or before case
                                  closure, whichever is sooner.
                               b) Complete a FAST re-assessment OR closure FAST as applicable. (Refer to
                                  Protocol for Completion of the Family Advocacy and Support Tool
                                  {FAST}).
                               c) CPS Case Manager or Team Leader documents case closure notification is
                                  made to the local Juvenile Court/District Attorney/Law Enforcement by local
                                  practice, in the case notes.
                               d) Form CS-0740, Child Protective Services Case Summary and
                                  Classification Decision of Child Abuse/Neglect Referrals, must be
                                  completed for all case closures, regardless of classification.
                               e)    Upload all documents in TFACTS. For each ACV who has a severe abuse
                                     allegation, there must be one CS-0561, Child Protective Investigative Team
                                     Review - CPIT review document uploaded under their name.
                               f)   Closing case summary in TFACTS (maybe the 740) as directed in Policy
                                    14.11, Child Protective Services Case File Organization, Documentation
                                    and Disposition.
                                    For child death/near death cases refer to DCS Policy 20.27, Child Death/Near
                                    Death Rapid Response.

F. Local protocols/
                            All requirements for local procedures or protocols (i.e. court, CPIT), as documented
   procedures
                            on CS-0251, Local Administrative Procedures and Protocols, are followed.

G. False Allegations       1. At the conclusion of a CPS case, the CPS Case Manager consults with the
                              RGC/designee to discuss whether:


   Original Effective Date: 14.6, 12/01/23
   Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                     Page 7 of 12
   Supersedes: DCS 14.7, 12/21/21
   CS-0001
   RDA SW22
   Subject: Child Protective Services Case Tasks and Responsibilities                            14.6
                                a) The reporter’s allegation was false.
                                b) It was more likely than not that the reporter knew, at the time of making the
                                   allegation, that the allegation was false.
                                c) The reporter has knowingly made a false allegation about the same ACV or
                                   AP.
                                d) The reporter’s address is known or reasonably available.
                           2. After a determination has been made whether malicious false allegations of abuse
                                or neglect have been reported, the CPS Case Manager or RGC may refer to the
                                local District Attorney’s office.

H. Abbreviated CPS         1. A CPS case may be abbreviated in the following situations with Team Leader
   Cases                      approval:
                              a) There is no evidence to support the conditions, circumstances or injuries
                                 described in the referral and no additional safety concerns exist; and/or
                              b) The child has left the state and there is no further involvement needed with the
                                 family.

                           2. An Abbreviated CPS case shall not occur when the CPS case includes any of the
                              following allegations:
                                    Sexual Abuse
                                    Preliminary Near Death; and/or
                                    Child Death

                           3. Case tasks for an Abbreviated CPS case include:
                                a) Child interview and/or observation: The CPS employee conducts an initial
                                   interview (or observation when applicable) with the alleged child victim (ACV)
                                   within the designated priority response time. The CPS employee
                                   interviews/observes all other children in the home.
                                b) Parent/Caregiver interview: The parent/caregiver is interviewed and informed
                                   of the allegation and of the child’s interview.
                                c) Home visit: The CPS employee observes the home.
                                d) Referent: When applicable, the reporter is contacted to confirm the reporter’s
                                   knowledge of the situation and obtain any additional information.
                                e) Collateral Contacts: If someone with information relevant to the allegations
                                   has been identified in the referral or through the course of the investigation or
                                   assessment, they are interviewed.
                           4. The following information, instead of standard documentation, is required in an
                              abbreviated CPS investigation/assessment:
                                a) Initial ACV Interview in case recordings (details shall be included on form CS-
                                   0740);

   Original Effective Date: 14.6, 12/01/23
   Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                      Page 8 of 12
   Supersedes: DCS 14.7, 12/21/21
   CS-0001
   RDA SW22
   Subject: Child Protective Services Case Tasks and Responsibilities                               14.6
                                b) Good Faith Efforts documented in TFACTS;
                                c) Form CS-0740, Child Protective Services Summary and Classification
                                   Decision of Child Abuse/Neglect Referral must include:
                                             • Interviews for the ACV, parent/caregiver, referent, and collateral
                                               contacts and/or witness interviews when applicable;
                                             • Observation of the home environment;
                                             • Summary of all notifications completed to include:
                                               o Juvenile Court Notification
                                               o For severe abuse allegations, convening and recommendations
                                                 of CPIT and notification to the District Attorney General.

                                d) The CS-0050, Case Intake Packet Documents and Native American
                                   Heritage Verification and CS-0789, Authorization for Release of
                                   Information to DCS: TennCare Eligibility and Authorization for DCS to
                                   Release Information to TennCare form must be included in the electronic
                                   file.

I. Reduction of Case       The Deputy Commissioner for the Office of Child Safety/designee may authorize a
   Tasks                   further reduction to core case management tasks when a critical state of affairs takes
                           place including:
                                       Natural disasters (floods, wildfires, tornados, etc.),
                                       Pandemic
                                       Severe Case Manager shortages

J. Safety                  Accurately and expediently assessing immediate safety and the potential for unsafe
   Considerations          recurrences are a primary function of CPS’ work with families. The following are
                           Safety Notices designed to support knowledge in specific safety-related domains:
                                a) Safety Notice: Significance and Supports for Interviewing Children
                                b) Safety Notice: Domestic Violence: Facts and Strategies for Response
                                c) Safety Notice: Understanding the Difference between Subutex and
                                   Suboxone
                                d) Safety Notice: Utilizing Medical Records as part of Substance Abuse
                                   Assessment
                                e) Safety Notice: Assessing a Newborn’s Drug Exposure
                                 f) Safety Notice: Creating Safe Environments for Youth Survivors of
                                    Exploitation
                                g) Safety Notice: International Assistance Locating Children or Families
                                h) Safety Notice: Understanding Fentanyl and Avoiding Accidental
                                   Exposure
                                 i) Safety Notice: Environmental Safety: Firearm and Medication Storage in
                                    Family Homes
   Original Effective Date: 14.6, 12/01/23
   Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                        Page 9 of 12
   Supersedes: DCS 14.7, 12/21/21
   CS-0001
   RDA SW22
   Subject: Child Protective Services Case Tasks and Responsibilities                     14.6


Forms:                     CS-0050, Case Intake Packet Documents and Native American Heritage
                           Verification
                           CS-0158, Notification of Equal Access to Programs and Services and Grievance
                           Procedures
                           CS-0251, Local Administrative Procedures and Protocols
                           CS-0559, Authorization for Release of Information and HIPAA Protected Health
                           Information TO or FROM the Department of Children’s Services and
                           Notification of Release
                           CS-0699, Notices of Privacy Practices
                           CS-0726, Child Protective Services/Non-Custodial Case File Documentation
                           and Organization Checklist
                           CS-0789, Authorization for Release of Information to DCS: TennCare Eligibility
                           and Authorization for DCS to Release information to TennCare
                           CS-0740, Child Protective Services Case Summary and Classification Decision
                           of Child Abuse/Neglect Referral
                           CS-0827, Non-Custodial Consent for Transportation
                           CS-1031, CPS Case Transition Checklist
                           CS-0498, Family Intervention Services Application
                           CS-0561, Child Protective Investigative Team Review
                           CS-0701, Immediate Protection Agreement
                           CS-0774, Contact Sheets for Genogram
                           CS-1209, Safe Sleep Assessment




Collateral                 14.2, Screening, Response Priority and Assignment of Child Protective
Documents:                 Services Cases
                           14.4, CPS: Locating the Child and Family
                           14.5, Child Protective Services Multiple Response System
                           14.7, Multi-Disciplinary Team: Child Protection Investigation Team
                           14.11, Child Protective Services Case File Organization, Documentation and
                           Disposition
                           14.13, Non-Custodial Immediate Protection Agreements
                           14.14, Removal: Safety and Permanency Considerations
                           20.27, Child Death/Near Death Rapid Response
                           Work Aid 1: CPS Categories and Definitions of Abuse/ Neglect


   Original Effective Date: 14.6, 12/01/23
   Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                              Page 10 of 12
   Supersedes: DCS 14.7, 12/21/21
   CS-0001
   RDA SW22
    Subject: Child Protective Services Case Tasks and Responsibilities                           14.6
                            Work Aid 5: CPS Courtesy Requests
                            Child Protective Services Tasks Manual
                            OCS Quality Documentation Guide
                            Protocol for Completion of the Family Advocacy and Support Tool (FAST)
                            Protocol for Safe Sleep Education and Delivery of Safe Sleep Furniture
                            Protocol for Working with Hospitals
                            Protocol for Medical Evaluations for Runaways or Commercial Sexual
                            Exploitation of Minor (CSEM)
                            Protocol for Notification to Substantiated Perpetrators
                            Protocol for Health Services for Trafficked Youth
                            Protocol for Child Death/Preliminary/Near Death Assignment and Review
                            Safety Notice: Significance and Supports for Interviewing Children
                            Safety Notice: Domestic Violence: Facts and Strategies for Response
                            Safety Notice: Understanding the Difference between Subutex and Suboxone
                            Safety Notice: Utilizing Medical Records as part of Substance Abuse
                            Assessment
                            Safety Notice: Assessing a Newborn’s Drug Exposure
                            Safety Notice: Beyond the Minimal Facts Interview
                            Safety Notice: Conducting an Efficient and Effective History Search
                            Safety Notice: Creating Safe Environments for Youth Survivors of Exploitation


Glossary:
Term                         Definition
Classify/Classification The decision whether child maltreatment has occurred and who is responsible.
Decision (CPS):
Preponderance of             The greater weight of the evidence required in a civil (non-criminal) lawsuit for the trier
evidence:                    of fact (jury or judge without a jury) to decide in favor of one side or the other. This
                             preponderance is based on the more convincing evidence and its probable truth or
                             accuracy, and not on the amount of evidence. Thus, one clearly knowledgeable witness
                             may provide a preponderance of evidence over a dozen witnesses with hazy testimony,
                             or a signed agreement with definite terms may outweigh opinions or speculation about
                             what the parties intended. Preponderance of the evidence is required in a civil case
                             and is contrasted with "beyond a reasonable doubt," which is the more severe test of
                             evidence required to convict in a criminal trial. No matter what the definition stated in
                             various legal opinions, the meaning is somewhat subjective.



Children with Sexual         Sexual behavior problems in children twelve (12) years and under which are
Behavior Problems:           developmentally inappropriate or intrusive acts of a sexual nature that typically involve
    Original Effective Date: 14.6, 12/01/23
    Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                    Page 11 of 12
    Supersedes: DCS 14.7, 12/21/21
    CS-0001
    RDA SW22
Subject: Child Protective Services Case Tasks and Responsibilities                          14.6
                         coercion or distress. This may also include children under eighteen (18) who clinically
                         function at an age of twelve (12) or younger (due to an intellectual or developmental
                         disability).




Original Effective Date: 14.6, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                   Page 12 of 12
Supersedes: DCS 14.7, 12/21/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
