             State of Tennessee
             Department of Children’s Services


 Administrative Policies and Procedures: 14.4


Subject:             CPS: Locating the Child and Family

Authority:           TCA 37-1-401et seq; 37-1-601et seq; 37-5-105 (3); 37-5-106; 37-5-107


Standards:           COA: PA-CFS 5; PA-CFS 6


Application: All Department of Children’s Services (DCS) Child Protective Services (CPS) and Special
                     Investigations Unit (SIU) Case Managers

Policy Statement:
Child Protective Services and Special Investigations Unit Case Managers shall make efforts to locate the
alleged child victim (ACV) and their family to determine if abuse and/or neglect have occurred and/or to
determine if services are recommended or required.

Purpose:
To locate the ACV and family to gather information necessary to assess for safety and/or risk to the ACV.

Procedures:
A. Locating the ACV           1. CPS must make efforts to see the ACV and family as applicable. Such efforts
   and Family                    may include:
                                 a) Visiting the following locations, if known:
                                       The ACV’s reported whereabouts;
                                       The ACV’s residence;
                                       The ACV’s school;
                                       The ACV’s childcare center or babysitter’s home.
                                 b) Contacting the following:
                                       Neighbor as a potential witness to the ACV’s wellbeing and
                                        whereabouts;
                                       Law Enforcement to check records for information which can locate the
                                        ACV or family;
                                       School Employee as a potential witness to the ACV’s wellbeing and
                                        whereabouts;
                                       Utility Companies to obtain information on the ACV and family’s
                                        address;
                                       Referent to verify or obtain additional identifying information;

Original Effective Date: 14.4, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                           Page 1 of 4
Supersedes: 14.5, 08/24/22
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: CPS: Locating the Child and Family                                                               14.4
                                       Landlord or person in control of a residential rental property;
                                       Known service providers;
                                       Social media searches;
                                       First Two;
                                       Clear Searches.

                                 c)   Researching TFACTS for previous DCS history and consulting with any
                                      prior case workers.

                                 Note: When a DCS child/family is unable to be located through the efforts
                                       listed above and there is reason to believe that the child/family has
                                       relocated to another country, refer to Safety Notice: International
                                       Assistance Locating Children and Families for additional options.

                              2. When making contacts in efforts to locate the family, any information regarding
                                 the family or extended family are components of a diligent search. Refer to
                                 Policy 31.9, Conducting Diligent Searches.
                              3. If the ACV and family are located however:
                                 a) The adult caregiver refuses to allow the CPS Case Manager to see or
                                    speak with the ACV:
                                       The CPS Case Manager explains their purpose and authority to see the
                                        ACV (refer TCA 37-1-406).
                                       If access continues to be denied, per policy 14.14, Removal: Safety
                                        and Permanency Considerations, the CPS Case Manager may
                                        pursue a court order, after consulting with the supervisor and regional
                                        legal counsel.
                                 b) The language of the ACV and family is different from the CPS Case
                                    Manager:
                                       The CPS Case Manager immediately contacts a translator, a translation
                                        services or translation app to assist in conducting an interview with the
                                        ACV and family members, privately. The CPS Case Manager must
                                        document the availability of the translation services or services used.
                                 c)   The ACV is unable to verbally communicate due to age, disability or other
                                      condition.
                                       The Case Manager observes the ACV for indications of distress, injury,
                                        or illness. The Case Manager may also utilize the non-offending
                                        caregiver, childcare provider or school employee to assist in
                                        communicating with the ACV. The Case Manager must document the
                                        means by which they communicated with the ACV and what was
                                        observed.




Original Effective Date: 14.4, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                          Page 2 of 4
Supersedes: 14.5, 8/24/22
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: CPS: Locating the Child and Family                                                             14.4

B. Courtesy Interviews         When an out of state child protection services agency or another Tennessee
                               DCS county office makes a courtesy request for assistance in contacting or
                               locating a child or family, refer to Work Aid 5: CPS Courtesy Requests for
                               additional information.

C. Unable to Locate the 1. If all attempts to locate the ACV and family fail, the CPS Case Manager
   Child and Family        confers with a Team Leader to determine the next course of action to ensure
                           the safety of the ACV. The Case Manager must document all Good Faith
                           Efforts (GFE) to see the ACV and family within TFACTS.
                              2. The CPS Case Manager completes GFE tasks within the priority response
                                 timeframe.
                              3. The CPS Case Manager visits the ACV’s residence if provided by the referent,
                                 school, law enforcement or utility company at least one (1) time. In addition,
                                 the CPS Case Manager conducts:
                                  a) One (1) additional home visit at a different time of the day, if the address is
                                     confirmed or believed to be where the ACV is located/living; or
                                  b) One (1) additional site visit which may include the school, childcare center,
                                     or babysitter’s home; or
                                  c) One (1) additional contact with a witness which may include a neighbor,
                                     law enforcement, school employee, childcare provider or babysitter for
                                     additional information.
                              4. If an ACV is not seen within the priority response, the CPS Case Manager
                                 shall:
                                  a) Staff all efforts with the Team Leader at response time and daily for next
                                     steps;
                                  b) Staff all efforts with the Team Coordinator by or on day 7 if the child is not
                                     located;
                                  c) Staff all efforts with the Director by day 14 if the ACV has not been located
                                     to ensure all efforts are exhausted or identify next steps.
                                  d) Prepare the case for closure by day 30 if ACV is unable to be located,
                                     despite all efforts.

                              Note: When the ACV is determined to be out of state, a courtesy request and
                                    follow up contact with that jurisdiction’s child welfare agency and/or law
                                    enforcement is considered a GFE.

D. Safety                     Sometimes case members may be reported as detained for deportation outside
   Considerations             the United States. See attached Safety Notice: Verifying/Locating Case
                              Members Reportedly Detained to Deportation and Brochure for Online
                              Deportee Locator System for information on confirming and locating individuals
                              federally identified for deportation.


Forms:                 Diligent Search Letter


Original Effective Date: 14.4, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                         Page 3 of 4
Supersedes: 14.5, 8/24/22
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: CPS: Locating the Child and Family                                                            14.4

Collateral             14.14, Removal: Safety and Permanency Considerations
Documents:
                       31.9, Conducting Diligent Searches
                       Brochure for Online Deportee Locator System
                       Safety Notice: Verifying/Locating Case Members Reportedly Detained for
                       Deportation
                       Safety Notice: International Assistance Locating Children and Families
                       Work Aid 5: CPS Courtesy Requests



 Glossary:
 Good Faith              Multiple, persistent, relevant attempts to locate the ACV within the identified priority
 Effort                  response timeframe.

 Residence               The location in which the ACV lives. This may include the family home, residential
                         facilities, family or kinship home (if the ACV lived there prior to the current DCS
                         involvement), foster home, or long term treatment facilities (such as NICU or
                         psychiatric hospital).




Original Effective Date: 14.4, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                        Page 4 of 4
Supersedes: 14.5, 8/24/22
CS-0001
RDA SW22
