                 State of Tennessee
                 Department of Children’s Services

Administrative Policies and Procedures: 9.5

Subject:             Access and Release of Confidential Child-Specific Information

Authority:           TCA: 33-3-103, 33-3-104; 36-1-125 through 36-1-141, 37-1-153, 37-1-409, 37-1-612, 37-2-
                     408, 37-5-105 (3), 37-5-106-107; Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
                     (HIPAA) of 1996 (P.L.104-191); DCS Rules and Regulations Regarding Access and
                     Release of Records: 0250-6-1, 0250-07-07, 0250-07-09, 0250-07-11, 0250-07-12; Fair
                     Credit Reporting Act 603(d)

Standards:           COA: PA-PRG 2


Application:         All Department of Children’s Services Employees

Policy Statement:
The Department of Children’s Services (DCS) ensures that records and information maintained by DCS are
confidential and only accessed or released according with State and Federal laws, DCS Rules, Regulations
and Policies. The access and release of confidential child-specific information, regardless of media, is limited
to individuals, agencies and organizations which demonstrate a "need and right to know" or received written
authorization from the child/youth or their legal representative.

Purpose:
To ensure guidelines are established for the release of confidential information. DCS protects the privacy of
the children/families in its care while providing access to information to entities that have a “need or right to
know.”

Procedures:
A. Access to                 1. Access to confidential records information is restricted and functionally
   Child/Youth                  accessible only to authorized individuals as designated by appropriate DCS and
   Records                      private provider management.
                             2. DCS management identifies staff who are authorized to have access to
                                confidential records in order to perform job specific duties as required by law,
                                regulations, policies and procedures.
                             3. Authorized private service providers identify employees that are authorized to
                                develop and maintain or to have access to confidential case file records in order
                                to perform job specific duties.
                             4. Procedures are implemented to ensure privacy and to avoid a conflict of interest
                                for authorized individuals when confidential case record information pertains to
                                them or their relatives.
                             5. Verification practices include, but are not limited to, the following:
                                 a) A written request with a date of birth and a photo driver's license or other

    Original Effective Date: DCS 9.5, 07/01/00
    Current Effective Date: 6/15/23                                                                       Page 1 of 5
    Supersedes: DCS 9.5, 07/26/19
    CS-0001
    RDA SW22
    Subject: Access and Release of Confidential Child-Specific Information                    9.5
                                      photo identification;
                                 b) Agency/private provider identification, credentials or other proof of
                                    government/organization status;
                                 c) A written request on agency/organization letterhead;
                                 d) A valid court order.
                             6. DCS manages and complies with State and Federal Laws, DCS Rules and
                                Regulations and Policies, regarding the access or release of child-specific
                                information regardless of media type (e.g., paper, electronic, etc.).

B. DCS Policies, Rules Specific DCS policies and other Rules and Regulations apply regarding the following
   and Regulations     record series:
   Governing Record
   Information
                       1. Medical Records
                          a) The child/youth's medical records are confidential and not open for inspection
                              by members of the public. Only authorized personnel have access to a
                              child/youth's medical records in accordance with applicable State and Federal
                              Laws, DCS Rules, Regulations, and DCS policies 20.25, Health Information
                              Records and Access, and 20.47-DOE, Access of Medical Records that
                              governs health/medical records.
                                b) Specific guidelines regarding the disclosure of protected health information
                                   (PHI) is in accordance with Health Insurance Portability and
                                   Accountability Act (HIPAA) Federal Law and DCS HIPAA policies.
                             2. Educational Records
                                Access to educational records (e.g., report cards, transcripts, special education
                                identification sheets and GED certificates, for a child/youth residing in a YDC or
                                private provider agencies, etc.) is handled in accordance with applicable State
                                and Federal Laws, DCS Rules, Regulations, and DCS policy 9.3-DOE, Youth
                                Education Records that governs education records.
                             3. Residential Treatment Child/Youth Case Files
                                a) The Residential Treatment Child/Youth Case File for a custodial child/youth is
                                    confidential and not open for inspection by members of the public. Only
                                    authorized personnel have access to the child/youth’s case file.
                                 b) Any person or entity that is provided access to records under this provision of
                                    the policy is required to maintain the records in accordance with State and
                                    Federal Laws and DCS Rules and Regulations regarding confidentiality.
                             4. Mental Health and Substance Abuse Records
                                The mental health and substance abuse record of children/youth is confidential
                                and not open for inspection by members of the public. Only authorized personnel
                                have access to the child/youth’s mental health records in accordance with
                                applicable State and Federal Laws, DCS Rules, Regulations, and DCS policies
                                20.25, Health Information Records and Access and 20.47-DOE, Access of
                                Medical Records.



    Original Effective Date: DCS 9.5, 07/01/00
    Current Effective Date: 6/15/23                                                                         Page 2 of 5
    Supersedes: DCS 9.5, 07/26/19
    CS-0001
    RDA SW22
   Subject: Access and Release of Confidential Child-Specific Information                    9.5
                            5. Finance/Accounting Records
                               Access to child/youth records is in accordance with applicable State and Federal
                               Laws, DCS Rules, Regulations and DCS policies that govern fiscal records.
                            6. Adoption Records
                               Access to sealed adoption records is in accordance with applicable State and
                               Federal Laws, DCS Rules, and Regulations and the Adoption Best Practices
                               Manual.

                            7. Child Protective Services (CPS) Records
                               Access to CPS investigative records regarding specific events or referrals
                               concerning a child/youth or family is in accordance with applicable State and
                               Federal Laws, DCS Rules, Regulations and DCS Policy 14.15, Confidentiality of
                               Child Protective Services Cases that governs CPS records. The name of the
                               referent in a Child Protective Services (CPS) case must not be disclosed under
                               any circumstances.

C. Release of Records 1. General:
                                a) Access to both open and closed child/youth case records requested through a
                                   valid court order or subpoena may be provided, but DCS General Counsel
                                   and/or DCS Records Management inspects the court order or subpoena
                                   before the records can be released.
                                b) All other requests (those without a subpoena or court order) are referred to
                                   the Grand Region Records Coordinator, who is responsible for ensuring that
                                   confidentiality provisions are not violated. Any questions or concerns may be
                                   delegated to DCS General Counsel or DCS Records Management to make a
                                   determination as to what, if any, records may be released.
                                c) Judicial, correctional, law enforcement and service providers that have
                                   established both a “need and right to know” may have limited access to
                                   confidential DCS records as required by State and Federal Laws, DCS Rules,
                                   Regulations and Policies.
                                d) Access to Records by Adults Who Were Previously in DCS Custody:
                                e) An adult, who was in DCS custody as a child/youth, has a right to request a
                                   copy of portions of his or her own file, subject to any exception contained in
                                   this policy. S/he has the right to a reasonable explanation and interpretation of
                                   the information.
                                f) Each person who requests and receives a copy of his or her file agrees to sign
                                   form CS-0684, Confidentiality Agreement in which s/he agrees to keep all of
                                   their information confidential and not release the information to the public.
                                g) CPS records must not be released without prior approval from DCS Legal or
                                   DCS Records Management.
                                h) Upon review by DCS Legal, the Team Leader or FSW/JSW/JPO is
                                   responsible for the redaction of protected information prior to the records
                                   being released to the requesting person(s). This redaction includes all
                                   references to the referent in CPS Cases and all other privileged and
   Original Effective Date: DCS 9.5, 07/01/00
   Current Effective Date: 6/15/23                                                                       Page 3 of 5
   Supersedes: DCS 9.5, 07/26/19
   CS-0001
   RDA SW22
    Subject: Access and Release of Confidential Child-Specific Information                    9.5
                                      confidential information pursuant to DCS policies and applicable State and
                                      Federal Laws. Releases through the Records Management Division will be
                                      reviewed by DCS Legal upon request.

                             2. Birth Parent, Guardian, or Foster Parent requesting the Record:
                                A birth parent, guardian, or foster parent of a child/youth in custody or risk of
                                custody is allowed to meet with the FSW/JSW/JPO or supervisor assigned to the
                                case and they have the right to a reasonable explanation and interpretation of the
                                records. Refer to Guide to Document Sharing for Staff, Foster Parents,
                                Advocates and Mentors.

D. Local Procedures   1. Each office and facility establishes local procedures and creates a logging system
   and Logging System    to record requests for information on both active and closed files for tracking
                         purposes. The log includes the following information:
                                      ♦ Name of child/youth;
                                      ♦ Date of birth;
                                      ♦ Type of request;
                                      ♦ Reason for Request;
                                      ♦ Date of release; and
                                      ♦ Name of person to whom information is released.
                             2. Written and verbal releases of confidential information from active case files are
                                documented on the appropriate screens or case recordings in TFACTS.
                                Documentation for inactive/closed case (paper) files is documented on a “Sign-
                                In/Sign-Out” log maintained in the front of the case file.
                             3. Controls and logging procedures are reviewed with appropriate personnel in
                                order to prevent the unauthorized or premature release of confidential
                                information.
                             4. All requirements to establish local procedures, protocols or guidelines are
                                documented on form CS-0251 Local Administrative Procedures and
                                Instructions.

E. Exceptions                1. Information considered to be damaging to the child/youth or affecting the safety
                                and security of others, (i.e., medical, psychiatric, psychological information,
                                police or incident reports, etc.), may be withheld from the child/youth, their parent
                                or guardian or any other person requesting the records.
                             2. DCS is not the authorized records custodian for agencies, providers, etc. DCS
                                only releases records produced by DCS.

F. Violation Sanctions 1. The unauthorized disclosure of certain confidential record information may be
                          punishable as a crime and subject to prosecution.
                             2. Violation of this policy by DCS personnel may result in disciplinary action, up to
                                and including termination.


    Original Effective Date: DCS 9.5, 07/01/00
    Current Effective Date: 6/15/23                                                                       Page 4 of 5
    Supersedes: DCS 9.5, 07/26/19
    CS-0001
    RDA SW22
   Subject: Access and Release of Confidential Child-Specific Information                    9.5
                            3. Violation of this policy by private provider personnel may result in contract
                               termination.

                CS-0251 Local Administrative Procedures and Instructions
Forms:          CS-0559, Authorization for Release of Information of HIPAA Protected Health
                Information TO and FROM the Department of Children’s Services and Notification of
                Release
                CS-0684, Confidentiality Agreement


Collateral      9.3 DOE, Youth Education Records
documents:
                14.15, Confidentiality of Child Protective Services Cases
                 20.25, Health Information Records and Access
                20.47-DOE, Access of Medical Records
                Adoption Best Practices Manual
                Guide to Document Sharing for Staff, Foster Parents, Advocates and Mentors
                Rules of the TN Department of Children’s Services:
                ♦   Chapter 0250-6-1 - Access to Public Records of the Department of Children's Services
                ♦   Chapter 0250-7-9- Classification and Review of Reports of Child Abuse/Neglect and
                    Due Process Procedures for Release of Child Abuse/Neglect Records
                ♦   Chapter 0250-7-7- Access to Adoption Records Finalized Prior to 1951 and Access to
                    Records Maintained by TN Children’s Home Society
                ♦   Chapter 0250-7-11 - Release of Non-Identifying Information from Records of
                    Adoptions and Transmittal of Medical Information Regarding Certain Persons
                    Affected by Adoptions
                ♦ Chapter 0250-7-12 - Rules Governing Access to Adoption Records for Adoptions
                  Finalized On and After March 16, 1951


Glossary:
Term            Definition
                None




   Original Effective Date: DCS 9.5, 07/01/00
   Current Effective Date: 6/15/23                                                                       Page 5 of 5
   Supersedes: DCS 9.5, 07/26/19
   CS-0001
   RDA SW22
