             State of Tennessee
             Department of Children’s Services


 Administrative Policies and Procedures: 14.25

Subject:               Special Investigations Unit Child Protective Services
                       Investigations

Authority:             TCA 37-5-105 (3), 37-5-106, 37-1-401 et seq, 37-1-601 et seq


Standards              COA: PA-CFS 5.08-5.10, PA-CFS 5.12


Application:           To All Department of Children’s Services Child Protective Services Special
                       Investigations Employees

Policy Statement:
The Department of Children’s Services (DCS) Special Investigations Unit (SIU) conducts investigations on
allegations of child abuse and neglect which occur while a child is in DCS custody or when the case
involves non-custodial children where the alleged perpetrator (AP) is acting in an official employment,
volunteer, or foster care capacity. The SIU conducts investigations where the allegations would affect the
employment or volunteer status of those working with children.

Purpose:
To provide DCS SIU employees with additional guidelines for conducting timely and effective investigations.

Procedures:
A. SIU Case Criteria           1. SIU is responsible for conducting investigations when the abuse or neglect
                                  occurred while the child was in custody.
                               2. SIU is responsible for conducting investigations when the abuse or neglect
                                  involves children who are not in the legal custody of DCS, but they are under
                                  the supervision or care of an individual(s)functioning in an official
                                  employment or volunteer capacity within the following but not limited to:
                                     Detention facilities
                                     Licensed foster homes
                                     Licensed day care/childcare agencies
                                     Unlicensed daycare facilities with more than four (4) children not
                                      including children related to the unlicensed daycare provider
                                     Schools
                                     Religious organizations
                                     Youth groups


Original Effective Date: 02/01/05
Current Effective Date: 5/25/22                                                                      Page 1 of 6
Supersedes: 14.25, 7/01/20
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Special Investigations Unit Child Protective Services Investigations                              14.25

                               3. SIU investigates allegations of abuse and/or neglect where the DCS
                                  employee is named as the alleged perpetrator or the alleged perpetrator
                                  resides in the home of the DCS employee. At the discretion of the Child
                                  Protective Services Director (CPSD) and the General Counsel, or their
                                  designees, a SIU Case Manager and legal counsel may be used from
                                  another region to conduct the investigation).
                                    Note: Regional staff may request assistance from SIU on macro cases or
                                          mega family investigations through the CPSD or designee.
                                    Note: For exceptions to this criteria refer to DCS Policy 14.3 Screening,
                                          Priority Response, and Assignment of Child Protective Services
                                          Cases.

B. Investigative              SIU staff refer to DCS Policy 14.6 Child Protective Investigation Team (CPIT),
   Responsibilities           14.7 Child Protective Services Investigation Track and Work Aid 3: Child
                              Protective Services Investigative Tasks and Activities for initiating and
                              conducting an investigation.
                              1. Home Visits
                                    a) A child’s primary placement is considered the child’s home for purposes of
                                       making a home visit (e.g. foster home, YDC, residential facility).
                                    b) If the placement has recently changed or the child experienced a move in
                                       connection with the circumstances that resulted in the allegations, the SIU
                                       case manager completes the following:
                                        Conducts a home visit and interviews the alleged child victim (ACV) in
                                         the new placement; and
                                        Conducts a home visit and interviews collateral contacts where the
                                         alleged incident occurred.
                              2. Coordinated Investigations
                                 a) SIU may coordinate investigative activities with other state agencies that
                                    share jurisdiction to include (but not limited to):
                                        DCS Licensing
                                        Department of Human Services (DHS)
                                        Department of Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities (DIDD)
                                        Department of Education
                                    b) Due to confidentiality, all SIU cases should be presented to the CPIT with
                                       only the following present:
                                        Investigator(s);
                                        SIU supervisor(s); and
                                        Office of Child Safety Management.
                                    Note: All other DCS employees should leave the room during the
                                          presentation to preserve confidentiality. Exceptions to this are
                                          coordinated investigations between regional Child Protective Services

Original Effective Date: 02/01/05
Current Effective Date: 5/25/22                                                                          Page 2 of 6
Supersedes: 14.25, 7/01/20
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Special Investigations Unit Child Protective Services Investigations                                14.25
                                           (CPS) case managers and SIU staff.
                              3. Investigations Involving Foster Homes
                                    The SIU Case Manager:
                                        Notifies the foster parents of their right to access a DCS foster parent(s)
                                         advocate;
                                    Note: The advocate is permitted to be present at all portions of the
                                          investigation when the accused foster parent(s) are present. All
                                          information received by the advocate therein remains confidential.
                                        Reviews the foster home study;
                                        Reviews any Corrective Action Plans involving the foster home or foster
                                         parents;
                                        Interviews the DCS Foster Care and Resource Placement Support staff
                                         involved with the foster home;
                                        Interviews Contract Provider Case Managers when the home is
                                         managed by a private provider;
                                        Completes the SIU Family Advocacy and Support Tool (FAST) within
                                         five (5) business days of intake; and
                                        Consults with DCS Legal staff when required (refer to DCS Policy 14.9,
                                         Non-Custodial Immediate Protection Agreements and 14.12,
                                         Removal: Safety and Permanency Considerations
                              4. Custodial Children
                                    The SIU Case Manager:
                                        Notifies the FSW within forty-eight (48) hours of the initiation of the
                                         investigation to coordinate notification to the biological parents/legal
                                         custodian;
                                        Coordinates with the applicable DCS staff to request the necessary
                                         medical and psychological examinations, referrals for services, and
                                         arrange transportation, if needed;
                                        Verifies current signatures of required forms in file and complete if out of
                                         date and place in the SIU case file;

                                        Consults with the FSW and reviews the Family Permanency Plan and
                                         Treatment Plan to ensure safety factors are being addressed;
                                        Reviews the AP’s personnel file specifically related to
                                         performance/discipline records.
                              5. Non-Custodial Children residing in a Licensed Facility:
                                    The SIU Case Manager:
                                        Notifies the parents or legal custodian(s) regarding the allegation(s)
                                         within forty-eight (48) hours of the initial ACV contact;


Original Effective Date: 02/01/05
Current Effective Date: 5/25/22                                                                           Page 3 of 6
Supersedes: 14.25, 7/01/20
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Special Investigations Unit Child Protective Services Investigations                                14.25

                                        Notifies the facility representative within forty-eight (48) hours regarding
                                         identified services;
                                        Obtains the parent/legal custodian’s signature on completed forms, as
                                         necessary;
                                        Reviews Treatment Plan for completion and progress to ensure safety
                                         factors are being addressed;
                                        Reviews the AP’s personnel file specifically related to
                                         performance/discipline records.
                              NOTE: For all Non-Custodial cases, a face to face contact with the ACV(s) is
                                    required each calendar month.

C. Safety & Risk              1. Based upon available information, SIU staff assesses the child's immediate
   Planning                      needs to ensure safety and reduce risks. Every effort is made to preserve
                                 critical relationships and maintain stability for the child. These decisions are
                                 made in conjunction with DCS supervisory staff and, when applicable, an
                                 agency participating in a coordinated investigation.
                              2. Using the appropriate formal assessment tool, SIU staff assesses safety and
                                 risk by completing a global assessment to utilize the outcomes of the
                                 assessment to support decision making as follows:
                                    a) SIU FAST within five (5) business days of intake when the case involves:
                                        Foster Homes
                                        Daycares
                                        Schools
                                        Youth Development Centers (YDCs)
                                        Youth Groups
                                        DCS Employees in their professional capacity, and/or
                                        Custodial Children
                                    b) FAST per the Protocol for Completion of the Family Advocacy and
                                       Support Tool (FAST) when the case involves a DCS Employee in their
                                       personal capacity and/or a person residing in their home is the AP.
                              3. Safety concerns and recommendations are addressed following DCS Policies
                                 14.2 Family Permanency Planning for Child Protective Services Non-
                                 Custody Cases, 14.9 Non-Custodial Immediate Protection Agreements,
                                 Considerations, and 16.27 Notice of Removal from a Foster Home.
                              4. Custodial Children:
                                    a) SIU, in coordination with regional staff, and Foster Parent Support
                                       determine the ability to meet the safety needs of the child in the current
                                       placement. Refer to Policy 16.27 Notice of Removal from a Foster
                                       Home.



Original Effective Date: 02/01/05
Current Effective Date: 5/25/22                                                                           Page 4 of 6
Supersedes: 14.25, 7/01/20
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Special Investigations Unit Child Protective Services Investigations                              14.25
                                    b) SIU requests a Child and Family Team Meeting (CFTM) before moving a
                                       child from the current placement, when possible. If this is not immediately
                                       possible, the SIU case manager, the FSW, and Team Leader or Team
                                       Coordinator discuss the investigation and schedule a CFTM as soon as
                                       possible. Refer to the DCS Child and Family Team Meeting Guide.

                                    c) If removal from the placement is warranted, regional staff are responsible
                                       for securing the child’s placement and transportation to the alternate
                                       placement. This includes children that are placed from other regions.

                                    d) SIU obtains a copy of the corrective action or safety plan from the FSW.

                              5. Non-Custodial Children:
                                    If removal of a non-custodial child is warranted when a custodial child is
                                    removed from a foster home, SIU staff are responsible for the removal of that
                                    child.

D. Notification              SIU staff makes all applicable notifications as outlined in Work Aid 11, Special
   Procedures                Child Protective Services Investigative Tasks and Activities.

E. Case Record                SIU case file documentation and organization is conducted as outlined in DCS
   Composition                Policy 14.16 Child Protective Services Case File Organization,
                              Documentation and Disposition.
                              Exception: SIU cases are identified in TFACTS under the child’s name.



Forms:                 CS-0826 CPS SIU Notification of Case Initiation and Closure




Collateral             Foster Parent Bill of Rights, page 34
documents:             DHS/DOE Memorandum of Understanding
                       Protocol for Completion of the Family Advocacy and Support Tool (FAST)
                       Protocol for Foster Home Quality Team
                       Work Aid 3 Child Protective Services Investigative Tasks and Responsibilities
                       Work Aid 11, Special Child Protective Services Investigative Tasks and Activities
                       14.2 Family Permanency Planning for CPS Non-Custody Cases


                       14.3 Screening, Priority Response, and Assignment of Child Protective Services
                       Cases
                       14.6 Child Protective Investigation Team (CPIT)
                       14.7 Child Protective Services Investigation Track


Original Effective Date: 02/01/05
Current Effective Date: 5/25/22                                                                         Page 5 of 6
Supersedes: 14.25, 7/01/20
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Special Investigations Unit Child Protective Services Investigations                 14.25
                       14.9 Non-Custodial Immediate Protection Agreement
                       14.12, Removal: Safety and Permanency Considerations
                       14.16 Child Protective Services Case File Organization, Documentation and
                       Disposition
                       16.27 Notice of Removal from a Foster Home
                       16.3, Desired Characteristics of Foster Parents
                       16.8, Responsibilities of Approved Foster Homes
                       Child and Family Team Meeting Guide




Glossary:              Terms


                       None




Original Effective Date: 02/01/05
Current Effective Date: 5/25/22                                                             Page 6 of 6
Supersedes: 14.25, 7/01/20
CS-0001
RDA SW22
