             State of Tennessee
             Department of Children’s Services


 Administrative Policies and Procedures: 14.8

Subject:            Child Protective Services Second Shift

Authority:          TCA: 37-5-105; 37-5-106


Standards:          None


Application: All Department of Children’s Services Child Abuse Hotline Employees, Child Protective
                    Services Employees, and Special Investigations Unit Employees

Policy Statement:
To ensure a Child Protective Services (CPS) Response after regular business hours while balancing the
workload of CPS staff.
Purpose:
To detail the tasks conducted by Second Shift teams in jurisdictions where they are enacted. Second Shift
CPS Teams provide primary coverage for Priority 1 (P1) referrals and any other CPS case situations that
require immediate assistance from the Child Abuse Hotline (CAH) for designated shift hours.


Procedures:
               1. The Second Shift Team Leader (TL) reviews and assigns P1 referrals to Second Shift
A. Intake
                  CPS Case Managers.
   Disseminati
   on          2. For Severe Abuse cases, the Second Shift notifies Law Enforcement for assistance as
                  needed.

B. Investigative 1. Second Shift CPS Case Managers will follow policies related to:
   Tasks            a) Meeting Response Times (See DCS Policy 14.2, Screening, Priority Response
                       and Assignment of Child Protective Services Cases and 14.4, CPS: Locating
                       the Child and Family);
                         b) Initiating the CPS case (See DCS Policy 14.6, Child Protective Services Case
                            Tasks and Responsibilities); and
                         c) Determine if intervention is needed up to and including the child(ren) entering state
                            custody (See DCS Policy 14.13, Non-Custodial Immediate Protection
                            Agreements, and 14.14, Removal: Safety and Permanency Considerations).
                    2. Second Shift CPS Case Managers may be assigned other tasks and duties at the
                       direction of the CPS Director or designee.




Original Effective Date: DCS 14.8, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                    Page 1 of 2
Supersedes: None
Subject: Child Protective Services Second Shift                                               # 14.8

C.            1. Second Shift CPS Case Managers will immediately, but no later than 24 hours after
Documentation    completion of investigative tasks will:
and Case
                     Establish the case participants in TFACTS;
Transfer
                     Add any additional case participants not included in the original referral;
                              Enter documentation into case recordings to include meeting the Good Faith
                               Effort requirements (See DCS Policy 14.4, CPS: Locating the Child and
                               Family).
                    2. An internal email notification is sent by 8:30 am the following business day after Second
                       Shift response is met to the Intake Analysts and Team Coordinators.

                    Note: If documentation cannot be entered into TFACTS, a typed summary of all
                         investigative tasks is provided to the assigned CPS Supervisor.




Forms:                  None



Collateral              14.2, Screening, Priority Response and Assignment of Child Protective Services
                        Cases
documents:
                        14.4, CPS: Locating the Child and Family
                        14.6, Child Protective Services Case Tasks and Responsibilities
                        14.13, Non-Custodial Immediate Protection Agreements
                        14.14, Removal: Safety and Permanency Considerations


Glossary:              Definition
                       None




Original Effective Date: DCS 14.8, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                   Page 2 of 2
Supersedes: None
