             State of Tennessee
             Department of Children’s Services
Administrative Policies and Procedures: 14.13

Subject:            Non-Custodial Immediate Protection Agreements

Authority:          TCA 37-1-406, 37-5-105 (3), 37-5-106


Standards:          COA: PA-CFS 5.01; PA-CFS 11.02


Application: To All Department of Children’s Services employees carrying and supervising non-custodial
                    cases and the Office of the General Counsel

Policy Statement:
The Tennessee Department of Children's Services uses a voluntary Immediate Protection Agreement (IPA)
as an option to ensure the safety of a child(ren) when the parent/legal custodian lacks sufficient protective
capacity to assure the child is safe from abuse or neglect.

Purpose:
To provide standard guidelines and procedures to address the immediate safety of a child(ren) during a Child
Protection Services (CPS) and Family Support Services (FSS) case when using an IPA.

                     The CPS or FSS Case Manager assesses the risk of harm to the child prior to asking
A. Assessing Risk of
                     the parent/legal custodian to enter into an IPA, DCS form CS-0701. The Case
   Harm
                     Manager makes a determination by collectively analyzing the presenting evidence in
                     the referral, areas of concern identified in the Department’s safety assessments, and
                     any risks identified. The Case Manager consults with his/her supervisor to discuss
                     safety options. Those safety options may include an IPA. Intervention may be
                     considered when one or more of these risk factors are present:
                           1. History of Abuse and Neglect Factors - There is evidence of past maltreatment
                              or continuous patterns of abuse and/or neglect that threaten the safety, health
                              and/or development of any child.
                           2. Child Factors - The child is vulnerable due to age, reduced visibility by others,
                              health, intellectual or developmental level, problematic behaviors, or there is
                              difficulty in the parent-child relationship.
                           3. Parent/Caretaker Factors – The behavior(s) of the parent/caregiver present a
                              threat of harm to the child and there is no evidence of sufficient family strength or
                              protective factors to counter the behavior(s) or condition.
                           4. Environmental Factors – There are significant problems in the home
                              environment relating to child safety or isolation from family support systems (also
                              refer to Protocol for Safe Sleep Education and Delivery of Safe Sleep
                              Furniture for additional safety information, if applicable).
Original Effective Date: DCS 14.13, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                      Page 1 of 9
Supersedes: DCS 14.9, 9/08/23
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Non-Custodial Immediate Protection Agreements                                                14.13

                           5. Service Provision Factors – Parents have had the opportunity to participate in
                              services to reduce risks, however, there are still concerns for the child(ren)’s
                              safety.

B. Implementing an         1. If a Case Manager encounters a situation where intervention is needed in order to
   IPA                        ensure the safety of the child, he/she must immediately discuss this matter with
                              the CPS or FSS supervisor to determine if an IPA is warranted.
                           2. The DCS Case Manager consults with a Master of Social Work (MSW) or an
                              individual with an advanced clinical degree to discuss aspects of the transition as
                              it relates to minimizing trauma as a result of removing the child from the home;
                           3. If an IPA is authorized by the supervisor, the Case Manager and/or CPS or FSS
                              supervisor consults with Regional General Counsel (RGC) /designee before the
                              IPA is implemented.
                              The implementation of an IPA must be documented in TFACTS as a case
                              recording.

C. Completing an IPA If the requirements in Section A and B are met, and the parent/legal custodian
                     voluntarily agrees to enter into an IPA, the Case Manager ager will:
                           1. Complete DCS form CS-0701, Immediate Protection Agreement, which must
                              contain the following information:
                                    The alleged perpetrator’s name;
                                    The safety concerns warranting the action/restriction of the parent/legal
                                     custodian;
                                    Steps being taken, that are agreed to by the parent/ legal custodian and
                                     voluntary, non-custodial caregiver(s), if applicable, to ensure the safety of
                                     the child;
                                    Clear requirements regarding visitation guidelines, if applicable, including
                                     the level of supervision required, frequency and duration, and identity of
                                     visitation supervisors, if needed;
                            Note: Any person supervising visitation can utilize CS-0594, Visitation Observation
                                  Checklist, to document the visit.
                                    The signature of the parent/legal custodian, any voluntary, non-custodial
                                     caregiver included in the agreement, Case Manager, CPS or FSS
                                     supervisor, and any other parties with significant responsibilities in the
                                     agreement; and
                                    The date through which the plan is in effect or is revised.
                           2. Provide signed copies of the IPA to the parent/legal custodian and the voluntary,
                              non-custodial caregiver;
                           3. Upload into TFACTS the signed IPA in the child’s official case record.
                           Note: If the alleged child victim is hospitalized, the IPA can be shared with the
                                  hospital staff for the purpose of safety, custody, placement, visitation, or
                                  treatment of the child (refer to Protocol for Working with Hospitals).



Original Effective Date: DCS 14.13, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                       Page 2 of 9
Supersedes: DCS 14.9: 09/08/23
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Non-Custodial Immediate Protection Agreements                                               14.13

                           4. A Child and Family Team Meeting (CFTM) is held prior to the implementation of
                              an IPA, if possible, or within three (3) business days following the IPA.

                            5. A Family Permanency Plan (FPP) is developed at the CFTM, if applicable, and
                               is used, as applicable, for conveying strengths and needs with the child and
                               family to ensure that safety, well-being, and permanency needs are addressed.
                                a) The parent/legal custodian participates in creating the FPP.
                                b) The voluntary, non-custodial caregiver(s) may participate in creating the FPP.
                                c) The Case Manager obtains the signature of the parent/legal custodian with
                                   legal custodial rights to the child on the FPP.
                                d) The Case Manager provides copies of the FPP to the parent/legal custodian
                                   and voluntary, non-custodial caregiver.
                            6. The Case Manager and supervisor/designee consult with the RGC within three
                               (3) business days, but no later than ten (10) business days from implementation
                               of the IPA to determine whether the IPA will be dissolved or a petition will be
                               filed. In the event that the Case Manager and RGC/designee have determined
                               that a petition will be filed, the petition should be filed no later than ten (10)
                               business days from implementation.
                                a) The Case Manager follows local protocols for submitting a referral to the
                                   RGC.
                                b) The referral includes a copy of the IPA and FPP, as applicable.
                                c) The contents of the petition may incorporate components or the entire
                                   agreement found in the IPA and/or services in the FPP as well as contains
                                   additional services and/or restrictions up to and including removal into state
                                   custody.
                           Note: A court order supersedes the IPA. If the family does not follow the terms of
                                 the IPA, the family will be notified that the Child and Family Team will need to
                                 meet to determine next steps to ensure the safety of the children.
                           Note: When DCS staff learn that the terms of a court order are violated, the Case
                                 Manager and/or supervisor notifies the RGC/designee. The DCS Case
                                 Manager will inform the family that if the Immediate Protection Agreement is
                                 not adhered to an alternate plan will be developed.

D. Non-Custodial       1. CPS and FSS Case Managers must explore the voluntary, non-custodial
   Placement with         placement with another parent as a first option for an IPA intervention.
   Custodial, Legal or
                       2. When the residential parent/legal custodian is completing an IPA with another
   Putative Parents
                          parent, the Case Manager must identify the legal status of both parents to
                          determine what steps must be completed to facilitate the implementation of the
                          IPA.
                                a) Non-residential/Non-offending legal parents (Married or Court-Ordered
                                   Custody): In circumstances where parents have joint custody, Case
                                   Managers consider the non-residential/non-offending parent as if the child
                                   were placed in the parent’s home at the initiation of the case. Placement with
                                   the non-residential/non-offending legal parent should be agreed to unless

Original Effective Date: DCS 14.13, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                     Page 3 of 9
Supersedes: DCS 14.9: 09/08/23
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Non-Custodial Immediate Protection Agreements                                               14.13
                                    significant safety concerns exist that would necessitate a removal from that
                                    parent. When exploring placement with these parents, the Case Manager
                                    shall conduct the following tasks:
                                      A home visit of the non-residential home;
                                      Background checks to include:
                                        • TFACTS history search
                                        • Local law enforcement checks
                                        • Internet checks
                                      Interviews with all household members.
                                b) Other non-residential/non-offending legal parents: When the non-residential
                                   or non-offending parent does not have a court order granting shared or joint
                                   custody of the child, Case Managers should consider agreeing to the parent
                                   as a voluntary placement if that parent can ensure the safety of the child and
                                   the parent meets DCS standards for placement. Examples of parents
                                   meeting this category include parents who have established parentage, but
                                   do not have court-ordered custody rights; parents who have only signed a
                                   Voluntary Acknowledgement of Paternity (VAP); and parents who only
                                   appear on a birth certificate. When exploring placement with these parents,
                                   the Case Manager shall conduct an expedited placement assessment to
                                   ensure safety for the child and assess the ability of the non-residential/non-
                                   offending parent to provide care for the child. The assessment includes, but
                                   are not limited to, the following tasks:
                                     Conduct a visit to the home to ensure that the environment is safe and
                                      has sufficient space for the child (also refer to Protocol for Safe Sleep
                                      Education and Delivery of Safe Sleep Furniture for additional safety
                                      information);
                                     Conduct face-to-face interviews with the non-residential/non-offending
                                      parent and all other persons in the home to assess their ability and
                                      suitability to protect the child and adhere to the terms of the agreement;
                                     Complete a DCS Records Check that includes a check of CPS records in
                                      TFACTS to determine if the non-residential/non-offending parent or other
                                      residents of the home have been identified as an alleged perpetrator who
                                      has been substantiated of child abuse and neglect;
                                     Complete a criminal history check that includes local criminal record
                                      checks from local law enforcement records or county court records for all
                                      adult household members;
                                     Complete the following forms:
                                        •      CS-0701, Immediate Protection Agreement;
                                        •      CS-1005, Non-Custodial Expedited Placement Assessment
                                               Summary;
                                        •      CS-0559, Authorization for Release of Information and HIPAA
                                               Protected Health Information TO and FROM the Department of

Original Effective Date: DCS 14.13, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                     Page 4 of 9
Supersedes: DCS 14.9: 09/08/23
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Non-Custodial Immediate Protection Agreements                                                     14.13
                                               Children’s Services and Notification of Release;
                                        •      CS-0660, Disclosure Statement: Options and Available Services
                                               for Relative Caregivers; and
                                        •      Relative Caregiver Program Brochure
                                        •      When applicable, complete CS-4203, Water Hazard/Pool Safety
                                               Assessment Tool. Any noted concerns, including a plan to address
                                               supervision and water safety and/or areas of non-compliance, are to
                                               be documented under Area of Concern on form CS-1005. The plan is
                                               not to exceed a two week period. Any extension to this timeframe to
                                               address the identified concern must be approved by the CPS
                                               Director/designee.
                                        •      Forms CS-0750, Background Criminal History
                                               Expedited/Emergency Purpose Code XIII Name Check and CS-
                                               1221, Waiver Agreement and Statement for Criminal History
                                               Checks (VECHS) is not required on the parent and other adults in the
                                               home unless the other background checks raise a concern regarding
                                               the child’s safety in the home. Examples of background check results
                                               that would require completion of this form include:
                                               o A criminal history with more than five (5) convictions;
                                               o Any charge or conviction of a crime against a child;
                                               o Any charge or conviction of domestic violence; and
                                               o A felony conviction within the past five (5) years.
                                    Note: If a Code X check is conducted, form CS-0691, Fingerprint Card
                                          Information and CS-1221, Waiver Agreement and Statement for
                                          Criminal History Checks (VECHS), must also be completed.
                                    Note: Prior Fingerprint results may be used in place of a new Code X
                                c) Alleged/putative parents: When a person has been named as a parent of a
                                   child, but there is no documentation that the person has been established as
                                   the child’s legal parent, Case Managers should treat the person as a non-
                                   custodial relative or other individual and follow the provisions set forth in
                                   Section E of this policy.
                           3. If the Case Manager is uncertain which of the above three categories apply (a-c),
                              the Case Manager and/or supervisor should consult with the RGC prior to
                              implementation of the IPA.
                           4. Potential voluntary placements and any other residents of the home who have
                              been substantiated will not be agreed to unless a waiver is granted as outlined in
                              the Non-Custodial Waiver Tip Sheet and documented on form CS-0921,
                              Waiver of Criminal Convictions, Pre and In-Service Training Requirements,
                              Non-Safety Issues, CPS Substantiations, and Education Requirement.
                           5. The requirements for custodial kinship placements are discussed with the
                              potential voluntary placement, including the difference between custodial and
                              non-custodial factors for placement approval and documented on form CS-4224,
                              Exception to be Approved as a Kinship Foster Home.

Original Effective Date: DCS 14.13, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                           Page 5 of 9
Supersedes: DCS 14.9: 09/08/23
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Non-Custodial Immediate Protection Agreements                                                  14.13

E. Non-Custodial           Relatives or other individuals may be considered as voluntary, non-custodial
   Placement with          placement resources if those persons can ensure the safety of the child and if those
   Relatives or Other      potential placements comply with DCS standards for placement. The procedures
   Individuals             below apply to placement with relatives or other individuals:
                           1. Prior to facilitating a child’s transition into the home of relatives and family friends,
                              the Case Manager is required to conduct an expedited placement assessment to
                              ensure safety for the child and assess the voluntary, non-custodial caregiver’s
                              ability to provide care for the child. The expedited placement assessment
                              includes the completion of a(n):
                               a)    Visit to the home to ensure that the environment is safe and has sufficient
                                     space for the child (also refer to Protocol for Safe Sleep Education and
                                     Delivery of Safe Sleep Furniture for additional safety information);

                               b)    Face-to-face interviews with the potential voluntary, non-custodial caregiver
                                     and all other persons in the home to assess their ability and suitability to
                                     protect the child and adhere to the terms of the agreement;
                               c)    A DCS Records Check that includes a check of CPS records in TFACTS to
                                     determine if the potential voluntary, non-custodial caregiver or other residents
                                     of that home is identified as an alleged perpetrator who has been
                                     substantiated of child abuse or neglect.
                                d) Criminal history checks that include local criminal records check from local
                                   law enforcement records or county court records for all adult household
                                   members.
                                e) In addition to DCS form CS-0701, Immediate Protection Agreement,
                                   complete the following forms:
                                      CS-1005, Non-Custodial Expedited Placement Assessment
                                       Summary;
                                      CS-0559, Authorization for Release of Information and HIPAA
                                       Protected Health Information TO and FROM the Department of
                                       Children’s Services and Notification of Release;
                                      CS-0691, Fingerprint Card Information;
                                      CS-1221, Waiver Agreement and Statement for Criminal History
                                       Checks (VECHS); and
                             Note: If the non-custodial caregiver is a relative, the following forms are provided
                                   and explained:
                                      CS-0660, Disclosure Statement: Options and Available Services for
                                       Relative Caregivers
                                      Relative Caregiver Program Brochure

                                f)   When applicable, if parent/child visitation is to be supervised by non-custodial
                                     caregivers, the family is to complete CS-0594, Visitation Observation
                                     Checklist.


Original Effective Date: DCS 14.13, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                         Page 6 of 9
Supersedes: DCS 14.9: 09/08/23
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Non-Custodial Immediate Protection Agreements                                                14.13
                                g) When applicable, complete CS-4203, Water Hazard/Pool Safety
                                   Assessment Tool. Any noted concerns including a plan to address
                                   supervision and water safety, and/or areas of non-compliance are to be
                                   documented under Area of Concern on form CS-1005. The plan is not to
                                   exceed a two week period. Any extension to this timeframe to address the
                                   identified concern must be approved by the CPS Director/designee.

                           2. Potential voluntary, non-custodial caregivers and any other resident of that home,
                              who have been identified as an alleged perpetrator will not be approved unless a
                              waiver is granted as outlined in the Waiver Tip Sheet for Employment,
                              Volunteering and Custodial Placements, and documented on form CS-0921,
                              Waiver of Criminal Convictions, Pre and In-Service Training Requirements,
                              Non-Safety Issues, CPS Substantiations, and Education Requirements.
F. Petitioning for
                           Prior to dissolution of the IPA, the Case Manager and supervisor should consult with
  Legal Action
                           the RGC/designee to determine whether legal action is necessary and available to
                           ensure the safety and welfare of the child. Such action might include:
                                    Removing the child to foster care or a third party placement;
                                    Obtaining a no contact or other restraining order prohibiting specific
                                     behavior by the parent/legal custodian; or
                                    Continuing services to the family once the IPA is dissolved.
                               Note: Nothing in this policy is construed as requiring the Department to file a
                                     petition at any time.



G. Dissolving an IPA        1. An IPA dissolves when:
                                    A petition has not been filed within ten (10) business days of the initiation
                                     of the IPA;
                                    A court order is obtained that supersedes the IPA;
                                    A subsequent IPA supersedes the initial IPA.
                             Note: A subsequent IPA cannot be completed simply to extend the timeframe for
                                   filing a petition, but must be based upon new facts or circumstances that
                                   warrant completion of another IPA.
                                    The child enters custody; or
                                    The voluntary, non-custodial caregiver can no longer provide care or safety
                                     for the child.
                            2. When an IPA is dissolved, the Case Manager documents the circumstances of
                               the dissolution in case recordings. The Case Manager is also responsible for
                               ensuring that all involved parties are aware that the IPA has been dissolved.
                            Note: Nothing in this policy is construed as prohibiting the Department from
                                  dismissing a petition at any time.




Original Effective Date: DCS 14.13, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                       Page 7 of 9
Supersedes: DCS 14.9: 09/08/23
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Non-Custodial Immediate Protection Agreements                                               14.13

Forms:                 CS-0559, Authorization of Release of Information and HIPAA Protected Health
                       Information TO and FROM the Department of Children’s Services and Notification
                       of Release
                       CS-0691, Fingerprint Card Information
                       CS-0660, Disclosure Statement: Options and Available Services for Relative or Kin
                       Caregivers
                       CS-0701, Immediate Protection Agreement
                       CS-0921, Waiver of Criminal Convictions, Pre and In-Service Training
                       Requirements, Non-Safety Issues, CPS Substantiations and Education
                       Requirements
                       CS-1005, Non-Custodial Expedited Placement Assessment Summary
                       CS-1078, Visitation Supervisor Background Checks
                       CS-1221, Waiver Agreement and Statement for Criminal History Checks (VECHS)
                       CS-4203, Water Hazard/Pool Safety Assessment Tool
                       CS-4224, Exception to be Approved as a Kinship Foster Home
                       Family Permanency Plan – (in TFACTS)
                       CS-0594, Visitation Observation Checklist


 Collateral             14.22, Child Protective Services Background Checks
 documents:            16.59, Disclosure of Legal Options and Available Services for Kin or Relative
                       Caregivers.
                       Relative Caregiver Program Brochure
                       Protocol for Working with Hospitals
                       Non-Custodial Waiver Tip Sheet
                       Waiver Tip Sheet for Employment, Volunteering and Custodial Placements
                       Protocol for Safe Sleep Education and Delivery of Safe Sleep Furniture


 Glossary
 Parent (For this      The parent is defined as:
 Policy Only)
                             Mother of any child born out of wedlock
                             Both parents of the child if legally married unless there is a custody order to the
                              contrary

 Immediate             An IPA is a course of action that parents/ legal custodians voluntarily agree to follow to
 Protection            ensure the safety of the child. This agreement must be used when a parent/legal
 Agreement:            custodian has access to the child and is the least restricted alternative to entering DCS
                       custody. IPA’s are not to be used in lieu of a Family Permanency Plan. IPA’s may

Original Effective Date: DCS 14.13, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                     Page 8 of 9
Supersedes: DCS 14.9: 09/08/23
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Non-Custodial Immediate Protection Agreements                                              14.13
                       include, but are not limited to, options such as:
                           a) Having the child stay with relatives or friends (i.e., Non-Custodial Placements);
                           b) Suspending visitation with one of the parties when both parties agree; or
                           c) Having the alleged perpetrator leave the home.


 Non-Custodial         A Non-Custodial Case refers to any case involving a child who is not in DCS custody.
 Case                  The physical care and custody of the child(ren) is with the parent/legal custodian.

 Visitation            A visitation supervisor is a person who is approved to supervise visits between a child,
 Supervisor            or children, and the parent/legal custodian who is participating in a voluntary immediate
                       protection agreement.
                       To become an approved visitation supervisor, form CS-1078, Visitation Supervisor
                       Background Checks, must be completed, unless the visitation supervisor is a DCS
                       employee, or works for a provider agency.

 Code X Name           A criminal background check used by social service agencies authorized under an
 Check                 approved state statute to receive criminal record information for the emergency
                       placement of children where the child’s health and safety may be endangered.




Original Effective Date: DCS 14.13, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                     Page 9 of 9
Supersedes: DCS 14.9: 09/08/23
CS-0001
RDA SW22
