             State of Tennessee
             Department of Children’s Services



Administrative Policies and Procedures: 16.4

Subject:            Foster Home Selection and Approval

Authority:          TCA 37-4-201-207; Interstate Compact on the Placement of Children, TCA 37-5-105(3), 37-
                    5-106, 39-17-1315; Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act of 2006, HR 4472;
                    Adoption and Safe Families, P.L. 105-89; Safe and Timely Interstate Placement of Foster
                    Children Act of 2006,P.L. 109-239 and the Social Security Act; Fostering Connections To
                    Success and Increasing Adoptions Act of 2008, P.L. 110-351; Bipartisan Budget Act of
                    2018, P.L. 115-123 (Family First Prevention Services Act, Section 50731, National Model
                    Foster Family Home Licensing Standards)

Standards:          COA: PA-CFS 12.02, PA-CFS 12.06, PA-CFS 23-24


Application: DCS Foster Care and Supervisory Staff and Contract Provider Staff
Policy Statement:
DCS recruits foster parents who are capable to provide for the safety, permanency, and well-being of children.
This policy is applicable to traditional non-related applicants desiring to become a potential placement resource
for children. Approved relative/kinship foster parents desiring to serve children with whom they do not already
have a significant relationship must meet all requirements of this policy.

Purpose:
To provide guidelines for identifying and approving qualified foster homes for placement of youth in DCS
custody or youth placed into Tennessee.

Procedures:
                             Serving as a foster parent or foster family for children in Tennessee is a privilege,
A. Minimum
                             not a right. Approved foster parent(s) will not petition to adopt, obtain guardianship,
   Requirements and
                             or file for custody of a child/youth in care of DCS unless the child’s Child and Family
   Expectations for
                             Team (CFT) concurs with the plan and gives written approval. Non-compliance with
   Becoming a Foster
                             this section may be grounds for immediate closure of a foster home.
   Parent
                             1. An applicant who wishes to become a foster parent must meet the following
                                criteria:
                                  a) Twenty-one (21) years of age. An applicant to be a foster parent for a sibling
                                     or other blood relative must be at least eighteen (18) years old;
                             Note: Some contract agencies have a minimum age requirement of twenty-five (25)
                                   for therapeutic foster homes.
                                  b) A legal resident of Tennessee a minimum of three (3) consecutive months
                                     prior to approval;


Original Effective Date: DCS 16.4, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                      Page 1 of 17
Supersedes: DCS 16.4, 3/07/24
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Foster Home Selection and Approval                                                              16.4
                                  c) A United States citizen or have been approved by the United States Citizen
                                     and Immigration Service as a Legal Permanent Resident;
                                  d) All adult household members pass a criminal background check;
                                  e) Applicants must be able to effectively communicate with the Department, the
                                     child/children, health care providers and other service providers. At least
                                     one applicant in the home must have functional literacy, such as having the
                                     ability to read medication labels;
                                  f)   Provide documentation of sufficient income or resources to meet household
                                       needs prior to the addition of a foster placement;
                                  g) All family pets receive rabies vaccination as required by law with verification
                                     of vaccination provided;
                                  h) All household members (adults and children) must have up-to-date pertussis
                                     (whooping cough) and influenza vaccines to foster children under the age of
                                     eighteen (18) months old or with significant documented medical needs.
                                     Foster parents may request exemption from this requirement on the basis of
                                     religious or moral convictions. To request exemption, the foster parent
                                     completes CS-4256, Vaccine Exception Declaration for Foster Parents
                                     and provides the document to their Foster Parent Support (FPS) worker or
                                     contract agency provider, who ensures the document is scanned into
                                     TFACTS in the documents section of the foster parent’s person home page.
                                  i)   Household members and their guests will not smoke, vape, or use other
                                       forms of e-cigarettes or smokeless tobacco inside the home or during
                                       transportation of a child in foster care. Precautions are put in place to protect
                                       children from secondhand smoke.
                                  j)   A house, mobile home, housing unit or apartment in which the dwelling and
                                       grounds is in reasonable state of repair within community standards. Non-
                                       dwellings in questionable repair can be considered for a waiver. A dwelling
                                       cannot be used for the purpose of temporary rental (e.g. Air BnB) given the
                                       potential liability associated with this type of living arrangement. If a
                                       separate living space on the property or sealed portion from the main house
                                       is used for rental, adherence to DCS policy regarding such living spaces
                                       must be followed.
                                  k) If residing in government housing, written confirmation from the Housing
                                     Authority must be provided to complete the home approval process to
                                     ensure the applicant’s eligibility for housing is not affected if allowed to
                                     foster.
                              2. Applicants are eligible regardless of gender, race, color, or national origin.
                              3. An applicant that wishes to become a foster parent is expected to participate in
                                 the following activities to assist the family in reaching permanency:
                                  a) Mentor birth parents;
                                  b) Transport children to routine appointments; and
                                  c) Participate in Child and family Team Meetings (CFTM), court hearings and
                                     other meetings.
                              4. Approval is a mutual selection process and is based on the applicant’s ability to
                                 meet specific approval requirements, meet regional placement needs and to
                                 promote DCS Standards of Professional Practice. Refer to form CS-1217,
                                 Acknowledgement of Understanding Regarding Placement Acceptance.

Original Effective Date: DCS 16.4, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                         Page 2 of 17
Supersedes: DCS 16.4, 3/07/24
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Foster Home Selection and Approval                                                          16.4
                              5. All adult household members that provide a parental/caretaking role (child care,
                                 transportation, discipline, or other support to children) must meet the same
                                 training and criminal history requirements as the foster parent applicant.
                              6. Foster homes wanting to be re-activated or re-classified follow the Protocol for
                                 Re-Activation and Re-Classification of Foster Homes. The completion of the
                                 new POPS Tool is only necessary if there are identified concerns.
                              7. DCS engages families whose initial interest involved the placement of a youth in
                                 the custody/guardianship/jurisdiction of another public agency pursuant to the
                                 Interstate Compact on the Placement of Children (ICPC). Refer to the ICPC
                                 Practice and Procedure Manual for details in practice for an inter-jurisdictional
                                 placement.

B. Response to               1. On behalf of DCS, a contractual provider will respond to inquiries or referrals
   Potential Foster             providing interested families with an overview of foster parenting, the home study
   Parents                      process and approval requirements. The contract provider will assist applicants
                                with the completion of paperwork, criminal background checks and registration
                                for pre-service training. Applicants that meet minimal qualifications and complete
                                pre-service training will be referred for a home study.
                             2. Foster home referrals submitted to the region through the Interstate Compact on
                                the Placement of Children (ICPC) are contacted by the assigned regional Foster
                                Parent Support (FPS) worker within seven (7) calendar days of the referral’s
                                entry into TFACTS.

C. Home Approval              1. The foster home approval process includes the completion of pre-service
   Process                       training, various forms, medical clearance, home safety inspection and a written
                                 home study.
                              2. Foster parent applicant and co-applicant are required to complete TN KEY pre-
                                 service training. All married couples are required to complete TN KEY
                                 regardless if one spouse may be identified as an “Other Adult” residing in the
                                 home. Couples in which one spouse is actively serving in the military can begin
                                 the home approval process by completing Item 3 of this section and passing a
                                 criminal background check. Upon passing the background check, the non-
                                 military spouse can complete the home approval process. The deployed military
                                 spouse is expected to complete pre-service training and the home study process
                                 upon returning home. Enrollment in pre-service training will occur within thirty
                                 (30) calendar days.
                              3. The foster home approval process begins with applicants providing forms CS-
                                 0688, Foster Home Application for Parenting, CS-0559, Authorization for
                                 Release of Information and HIPAA Protected Health Information TO or
                                 FROM the Department of Children’s Services and Notification of Release,
                                 CS-0691, Fingerprint Card Information and CS-1221, Waiver Agreement and
                                 Statement for Criminal History Checks (VECHS). These documents are
                                 returned to DCS/contract provider staff prior to or at the beginning of session one
                                 of TN KEY training.
                              4. Once the applicant(s) enters TN KEY training, they are provided access to
                                 remaining forms to be completed for the home approval process.
                              5. On behalf of DCS, a contract provider will make a referral to the home study
                                 writer contractor, at minimum, after module two of TN KEY.
                              6. The foster home study writer conducts interviews with the potential foster
                                 parents, together and separately, and individually with all other household
Original Effective Date: DCS 16.4, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                      Page 3 of 17
Supersedes: DCS 16.4, 3/07/24
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Foster Home Selection and Approval                                                           16.4
                                 members as outlined in the Documentation of the Foster Family Home Study
                                 and the Profile of Parenting Study (POPS) Tool. A home consultation is also
                                 completed using CS-0676, Home Safety Checklist.
                              7. Each foster parent applicant and each member of the family provides a medical
                                 report from a licensed physician, nurse practitioner or equivalent health care
                                 professional documenting the acceptable physical and emotional health of all
                                 household members. Forms CS-0678, Foster Parent/Other Adult Medical
                                 Report and CS-0427, Child’s Medical Report may be used to document the
                                 applicant’s current medical status, and other adult or child/youth household
                                 members. In cases where a child/youth as a household member has had a well-
                                 baby check or physical examination for school within the last twelve (12) months,
                                 the applicants may submit the documentation from that appointment.
                              8. Verifications of valid handgun carry permit, driver’s license, vehicle registration,
                                 current vehicle liability insurance, current marriage, the previous marriage
                                 annulment or divorce decree, births, adoptions and custody matters of children in
                                 the home including an adjudication of delinquency, if applicable, are provided by
                                 each applicant. In situations where an applicant is separated from their spouse,
                                 documentation of a divorce, annulment, legal separation or death of separated
                                 spouse has to be obtained prior to moving forward with an adoption.
                              9. All household members (adults and children) must have up-to-date pertussis
                                 (whooping cough) and influenza vaccines to foster children under the age of
                                 eighteen (18) months old or with significant documented medical needs.
                                 Note: Flu season is considered active during the months of October through
                                       March. Therefore, all household members are expected to obtain the
                                       influenza vaccine as close to the beginning of this time frame as possible.
                                       Children under the age of eighteen (18) months will not be placed in the
                                       home until proof of vaccination has occurred.
                             10. Any household member who may provide transportation to a foster child shall
                                 provide copies of a valid Tennessee driver’s license, vehicle registration, current
                                 vehicle liability insurance, and proof of county vehicle inspection (where
                                 applicable).
                            11. References are obtained from three (3) individuals not related to the applicants,
                                as well as one (1) relative reference from each of the applicants. The individuals
                                providing references may not reside in the home of the applicants.

D. Mandatory Pre-            1. DCS schedules and offers multiple TN KEY groups each month. Contract
   Service Training             providers schedule TN KEY groups as required.
                             2. All traditional applicants attend a TN KEY Informational Meeting to become better
                                oriented to the training and home study approval process prior to attending TN
                                KEY sessions.
                             3. All traditional applicants are required to complete twenty-five (25) hours of TN
                                KEY Pre-Service training. Relative/Kinship foster parents desiring to foster
                                traditionally will be required to complete twenty-five (25) hours of TN Key Pre-
                                Service training.
                             4. Therapeutic foster homes are required to complete thirty-one (31) hours of Pre-
                                Service training that includes TN KEY twenty-five (25) hours and a minimum of
                                six (6) hours of therapeutic foster parent training.
                             5. Although there can be no changes to the TN KEY Curriculum, staff can submit a
                                waiver for TN KEY Modification on form CS-0921, Waiver of Criminal
Original Effective Date: DCS 16.4, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                      Page 4 of 17
Supersedes: DCS 16.4, 3/07/24
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Foster Home Selection and Approval                                                           16.4
                                 Convictions, Pre and In-Service Training Requirements, Non-Safety Issues,
                                 CPS Substantiations and Educational Requirements (refer to form
                                 instructions for required signatures) if any of the following TN KEY training
                                 formats best meet the needs of the family:
                                  a) Use of TN KEY training with one individual, rather than in a larger, group
                                     format. Upon approval, staff complete and submit form CS-1158, Individual
                                     TN KEY Training to the Office of Training and Professional Development for
                                     review and approval.
                                  b) Substitution of other approved training and past fostering experiences
                                     accepted as TN KEY equivalent.
                                 TN KEY is co-led by a DCS or contract provider staff person who has a minimum
                                 of a bachelor’s degree, along with a trained DCS or contract provider foster
                                 parent. Youth co-leaders are also included in TN KEY Training Sessions as
                                 identified and relevant to their expertise.

                              6. All foster parent applicants and/or any adults living in the household who have a
                                 parenting role must complete TN KEY training.
                             Note: Birth parents that are residing in an applicant's home are not required to take
                                   TN KEY.
                              7. A waiver request is not necessary for adults living in the foster home who have
                                 no parenting role. Clear documentation in the foster home record is completed to
                                 explain why the individuals are exempt from TN KEY training.
                              8. Older birth or adopted children who are living in the home of the foster parents
                                 that turn eighteen (18) years old after the parents are approved, do not have to
                                 complete TN KEY, unless they have a parenting role.
                              9. Foster homes that have been closed for less than two (2) years and were in good
                                 standing at the time of closure are not required to re-take initial TN KEY training.
                                 Trainers use DCS form CS-1229, Foster Parent Pre-Service Refresher
                                 Training Plan to refresh foster homes closed in good standing for a period in
                                 excess of two (2) years on pre-service training components:
                                 a) Conduct an informal verbal assessment to determine an appropriate training
                                    plan for the foster family using the guidelines below (b-f).
                                 b) Deliver Pre-Service Refresher training in the home using the outline
                                    established.
                                 c) Confirm the last date that parent completed Medication Administration. If
                                    more than two (2) years, parents are required to attend a Medication
                                    Administration Refresher course via live webinar.
                                 d) Enroll applicants in CPR/FA if their certification has lapsed.
                                 e) Complete a new Pre-Service Training Assessment form for the family and
                                    submit to the Home Study writer,
                                 f) Foster parents will not be required to attend a TN KEY group. Parents do one
                                    of the following after the refresher is completed:
                                    ♦ Receive in-home training on one or more modules as determined by the
                                      completed Assessment;
                                    ♦ Attend a TN KEY module or group if the foster parent elects to attend
                                      and/or prefers this option to the in-home training requirement;

Original Effective Date: DCS 16.4, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                      Page 5 of 17
Supersedes: DCS 16.4, 3/07/24
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Foster Home Selection and Approval                                                          16.4
                                    ♦ Proceed with fostering upon approval of home study.
                              10. If a home has completed TN KEY training but has remained in pending status for
                                  more than one year or a home completes Pre-Service training in another state,
                                  the Office of Training and Professional Development must evaluate whether the
                                  foster parents are required to retake TN KEY or other recommended courses. If
                                  it is decided the family does not need to re-enroll in TN KEY, the rationale is
                                  documented in the foster home study.
                             11. Foster Parent Support (FPS) staff, Trainers and contract providers should
                                 consult to exchange/share training and certification information.
                             12. In addition to the completion of TN KEY training, an applicant completes:
                                  a) CPR/First Aid six (6) hours certification or non-certification class (medical
                                     professionals such as doctors or nurses who are certified due to employment
                                     can present their current/CPR/First Aid certification to TN KEY trainer or
                                     home study writer for approval consideration instead of taking the course).
                                     Online CPR/First Aid training is not allowed; and
                                  b) Medical Resources and Information (MRI) four (4) hours. Medical
                                     professionals can complete the following online course to fulfill this
                                     requirement: Medication Administration for Medical Professionals.
                                  c) Mutual Assessment Process (MAP) Meeting one (1) hour with TN KEY
                                     trainer.

E. General Areas of          During the foster home study process, the foster home study writer or FPS
   Assessment                assesses, at minimum, the following areas with the applicants:
                              1. All areas outlined in DCS Policy 16.3, Desired Characteristics of Foster
                                 Parents;
                              2. Understanding of core components of TN KEY; trainers complete DCS form CS-
                                 1227, TN KEY Assessment, to document the applicant’s pre-service training
                                 experience. Foster parent applicants complete DCS form CS-1228,TN KEY
                                 Mutual Assessment Process Questionnaire, to document their understanding
                                 of the core components of TN KEY. The Home Study writer summarizes both
                                 documents in the Training Experience section of the home study narrative;
                              3. Parenting interests, abilities and willingness to foster certain behavioral
                                 characteristics are documented on form CS-0962, Foster Parent Applicant
                                 Questionnaire;
                              4. The home study writer discusses CS-0553, Discipline Policy, and CS-0670,
                                 Oath to Abide ensuring understanding of responsibilities prior to signing/dating
                                 the forms.
                              5. Foster home capacity is not to exceed more than five (5) total children/youth
                                 (including birth and adopted children/youth) in a foster home. Refer to
                                 Guidelines for Foster Home Placements Exceeding Five Total Children in a
                                 Foster Home for guidance. Any other situation requiring a Placement Exception
                                 Request refer to DCS Policy 16.46, Child/Youth Referral and Placement);
                              6. The home’s environment for safety and risk, documenting whether the
                                 prospective residence meets acceptable sanitary requirements, utilizing form
                                 CS-0676, Home Safety Checklist and the Home Safety Checklist Work Aid.
                                 Although this list is not designed to be comprehensive, all items must be
                                 complied with and the following areas are assessed and confirmed:
                                   a) Physical facilities meet the needs of children based on age, gender, sibling
Original Effective Date: DCS 16.4, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                     Page 6 of 17
Supersedes: DCS 16.4, 3/07/24
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Foster Home Selection and Approval                                                            16.4
                                         group status and any other special needs;
                                   b) The residence is free of hazards.
                                   c) The residence has an adequate water supply:
                                        ♦ Applicants who rely on well water provide documentation of its safety;
                                   d) The residence has working toilet and bathroom with tub and/or shower;
                                   e) The residence has a properly operating kitchen with a sink, refrigerator,
                                      stove and oven;
                                   f)    The residence has heating and cooling units in safe operating condition;
                                   g) The residence has a working telephone (landline or cell phone to connect to
                                      local 911 emergency services) or access to a working telephone in close
                                      walking proximity. Homes with no telephone access must include
                                      emergency telephone procedures in the home’s evacuation/safety plan;
                                   h) The residence has adequate sewage disposal;
                                   i)    The residence has adequate sleeping space:
                                        ♦ Unfinished attics, basements, hallways or other outbuildings may not be
                                          used as sleeping rooms;
                                        ♦ Children have their own bed that includes a mattress, box springs (unless
                                          they are bunk beds) and bed frame. Platform beds are also acceptable
                                          (refer to the Protocol for Safe Sleep Education and Delivery of Safe
                                          Sleep Furniture and/or the Home Safety Checklist Work Aid if
                                          applicable);
                                        ♦ Baby Hammocks, baby boxes or Rock ‘n Play Sleepers are prohibited;
                                        ♦ No more than two (2) children share a sleeping room. Exceptions can be
                                          considered on a case by case review as outlined in this section per the
                                          non-safety waiver guidelines.
                                        ♦ Children three (3) years of age or older may not share the bedroom of the
                                          foster parent(s) except for brief periods of illness or emotional distress.
                                        ♦ Children ages four (4) years old and under, of the opposite sex and who
                                          are siblings are allowed to share sleeping rooms;
                                  Note: A child’s bedroom should be a place of reasonable privacy based on age
                                        and development. However, on a case-by-case review, video and audio
                                        supervision can be considered to monitor a child for safety. Such a
                                        decision is to be discussed and agreed upon by the Child and Family
                                        Team and implemented in a Child Safety Plan. A Team Coordinator must
                                        attend the CFT and be in agreement for the usage of cameras. The
                                        decision is to be included in the CFT summary and reviewed throughout
                                        the placement. The need to use cameras for the identified child’s
                                        circumstances must be evaluated with each new placement.
                                           In any situation in which audio/video supervision is approved, the child
                                           must be informed of such supervision. Any usage of audio is to be turned
                                           off during private discussions between child and DCS and/or contract
                                           provider workers.
                                   j) The residence has adequate storage space to allow for clutter free shared
                                      living spaces and for each custodial child to store their personal possessions.


Original Effective Date: DCS 16.4, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                       Page 7 of 17
Supersedes: DCS 16.4, 3/07/24
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Foster Home Selection and Approval                                                            16.4


                              7. Pets or domestic animals:
                                   a) In or on the premises of a foster home are kept in a safe and sanitary
                                      manner in accordance with state and local laws;
                                   b) All family pets receive rabies vaccination as required by law with verification
                                      of vaccination provided. Pets intolerant to the rabies vaccination may be
                                      considered for waiver by Central Office with the following provided:
                                      ♦ Documentation from the veterinarian of the pet’s negative response to
                                        the vaccine or risk of a negative reaction due to age/illness; and
                                      ♦ The pet’s likely exposure to rabies (i.e. inside only pet, fenced yard only,
                                        frequents dog park, goes hiking with family, etc.).
                                   c) Though there is no limit to the number of pets allowed in a home, this is
                                      considered upon final assessment of the home study.
                              8. The residence is free from rodents and insect infestation.
                              9.    Foster parents who are gun owners adhere to the following:
                                   a) TCA 39-17-1307 constitutional carry and TCA 39-17-1351 handgun carry
                                       permit laws;
                                      ♦ Provide DCS/contract provider staff with a photocopy of the permit when
                                        applicable;
                                      ♦ Each permit carrier is responsible for the renewal of the permit as
                                        required by TCA 39-17-1351 or other applicable law;
                                      ♦ The permit holder provides DCS/contract provider staff with a copy of the
                                        gun permit at time of renewal;
                                      ♦ Per TCA 39-17-1351(r)(1), out-of-state handgun carry permits are
                                        transferred within six months (6) of establishing residency in TN;
                                      ♦ Foster Parents who possess a handgun permit and choose to carry a
                                        weapon in their vehicle complies with TCA 39-17-1313.
                                      ♦ Foster Parents who possess a handgun permit and choose to carry a
                                        weapon on their person or in their vehicle in the presence of children in
                                        their care exercise extreme caution at all times and comply with all
                                        applicable state and federal laws while possessing such handgun.
                                      ♦ Foster Parents who meet the requirements of TCA 39-17-1315 (e.g., law
                                        enforcement officer, police officer, bonded and sworn deputy sheriff,
                                        director, commissioner, county magistrate, or retired law enforcement)
                                        who choose to carry a handgun at all times provide documentation of the
                                        written directive required by TCA 39-17-1315 to DCS/contract provider
                                        staff. Such individuals comply with item b of this section (below)
                                        regarding storage of weapons and ammunition.
                               Note: Refer to form CS-0670, Foster Parent Oath to Abide.
                                   b) All firearms, bows and arrows, hunting knives and weapons of any variety
                                      are housed and locked in a secure gun cabinet or other secure storage
                                      facility inaccessible to children. Gun cabinets with glass enclosures or glass
                                      doors are not appropriate. Trigger locks can be used to secure firearms.
                                      Keys to the gun cabinet(s) or trigger lock(s) are secured in a separate
                                      location. Ammunition is stored and locked separately away from the gun’s
Original Effective Date: DCS 16.4, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                       Page 8 of 17
Supersedes: DCS 16.4, 3/07/24
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Foster Home Selection and Approval                                                           16.4
                                       location.
                               10. Residential/private swimming pools in Tennessee are required to adhere to
                                   Building Officials and Code Administrators (BOCA) National Building
                                   Codes including, but not limited to, having a pool barrier, locking gate, and pool
                                   alarm (https://www.fenceanddeckconnection.com/docs/BOCA Codes.pdf).
                                   Homeowners will also adhere to any city and/or county safety ordinances that
                                   are in excess of BOCA and provide documentation of compliance by having a
                                   copy of local regulations in their home for review. For areas in which there are
                                   no pool ordinances, provide the name and contact information of the city/county
                                   official providing information. A print off from the city/county website is also
                                   acceptable.
                                      ♦ Any home with a pool, spa or other water safety hazard must create a
                                        safety plan. The safety plan is addressed within the home study or in an
                                        addendum for already approved foster homes regarding pools or any
                                        other water hazards on the property. This safety plan is to be
                                        communicated with children placed in the home in conjunction with
                                        sharing emergency numbers and other household rules.
                                      ♦ Pool safety includes but are not limited to items listed on form CS-4203,
                                        Water Hazard/Pool Safety Assessment Tool. The tool is to be
                                        completed during the initial home visit and prior to foster home approval
                                        or at installation of a pool/spa at an approved foster home. Any noted
                                        concerns or areas of non-compliance are to be documented under non-
                                        compliance on form CS-0676, Home Safety Checklist, including a safety
                                        plan to address supervision and water safety. The safety plan is not to
                                        exceed a two (2) week period. Any extension to this timeframe to
                                        address the identified concern must be approved by the Regional
                                        Administrator/designee or contract provider, Executive Director/designee.
                                      ♦ Continued water safety is to be assessed during monthly home visits.
                             11. In an effort to ensure each placement is a drug-free environment foster parents
                                 are held to expectations outlined in the Protocol for Drug and Medication
                                 Expectations for Approved Foster Homes and the Controlled Substance
                                 and Medication Work Aid.
                              12. Specific non-safety issues may be waived during the approval process of the
                                  foster home. Any considerations for waiver are documented on form CS-0921,
                                  Waiver of Criminal Convictions, Pre and In-Service Training
                                  Requirements, Non-Safety Issues, CPS Substantiations and Educational
                                  Requirements, and clearly identified as a “non-safety issue”. The waiver is
                                  reviewed and approved by the Regional Director or the contract provider
                                  Executive Director or his/her designee before being submitted to Central Office
                                  for final approval. Information contained in CS-0921 is documented in the
                                  foster home study narrative.




Original Effective Date: DCS 16.4, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                      Page 9 of 17
Supersedes: DCS 16.4, 3/07/24
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Foster Home Selection and Approval                                                          16.4

F. Fire Safety               1. Foster homes contain the following:
                                 a) UL-approved, operational smoke and carbon monoxide detectors on every
                                    level of the home:
                                      ♦ Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors where children sleep are
                                        located in the child/youth’s bedroom, or in the hallway adjacent to the
                                        child/youth’s bedroom.
                                 b) A functioning fire extinguisher for each floor of the residence. The usage of
                                    other fire suppressants must be UL-approved.
                             2. Applicants prepare a floor plan of their home, which identifies the location of all
                                smoke detectors, carbon monoxide detectors and fire extinguishers and
                                illustrates evacuation routes in case there is a fire in the home. The evacuation
                                plan and emergency phone numbers are posted in a prominent location inside
                                the home. Only a copy of the evacuation plan is uploaded into the electronic case
                                file.
                             3. The foster home study writer discusses a fire drill plan with the applicants during
                                the foster home study process. Fire drill plan discussion includes:
                                 a) How fire drills might be conducted in the family home;
                                 b) How each family member would be made aware of the plan;
                                 c) The location where all family members would meet after the home is
                                    evacuated; and
                                 d) How family members with special needs will be assisted.


G. Assessment of             1. The foster home study writer assesses the quality of an applicant’s current and
   Relationships                past relationships. The foster home study narrative includes an assessment of the
                                potential foster parent’s ability to build and maintain trusting and stable
                                relationships with persons including their own children, family members, friends
                                and others significant to the applicant. Significant relationships are assessed
                                based on duration as well as the number of relationships over time. This
                                assessment includes the following:
                                   ♦ Reviewing and discussing the Foster Parent Applicant Questionnaire
                                     (CS-0962);
                                   ♦ TN KEY training and CS-1038, TN KEY Participant Assessment;
                                   ♦ Face to face and virtual interviews;
                                   ♦ Contacting the references (CS-0963, Foster Family Reference Letter and
                                     Questionnaire); and
                                   ♦ Completing of the POPS tool.
                              2. A conversation is held with each member of the household to assess their
                                 attitude about sharing their home with children from the child welfare system.

                             3. A summary of these conversations is included in the foster home study narrative.

H. Background and            1. A criminal background check begins immediately or no later than Session One of
   Criminal Records             TN KEY to ensure applicants and other adult household members meet State,
   Clearance                    Federal and DCS qualifications regarding a criminal history.

Original Effective Date: DCS 16.4, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                    Page 10 of 17
Supersedes: DCS 16.4, 3/07/24
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Foster Home Selection and Approval                                                              16.4
                             2. All findings identified as a result of the criminal history check are documented on
                                form CS-0687, Background Check History and IV-E Eligibility Checklist, with
                                results attached along with form CS-0921, Waiver of Criminal Convictions, Pre
                                and In-Service Training Requirements, Non-Safety Issues, CPS
                                Substantiations and Educational Requirements, when applicable. Such
                                results are reported in the foster home study and maintained in the foster home
                                electronic case file.
                              Note: For waivers and approvals on misdemeanor and felony convictions, refer to
                                    the Waiver Tip Sheet for Employment, Volunteering and Custodial
                                    Placements.
                             3. A complete criminal history check includes the following five (5) checks. The
                                completion of all checks must take into account current, maiden, and any other
                                previous legal names.
                             4. A local criminal records check from local law enforcement or county court for
                                each jurisdiction resided within the immediate six (6) months preceding
                                application. All criminal charges listed in the local criminal history check for
                                which there is no final disposition (misdemeanor or felony) identified is clarified
                                by obtaining additional documentation from the local court with jurisdiction.

                                       ♦ Each criminal history records check is to be completed in accordance with
                                         policy to ensure timely assessment of foster homes. However, to allow for
                                         human error, it is permissible to rectify errors (i.e. incorrect name spelling,
                                         DOB, SSN) on such checks. Newly conducted checks that show no
                                         results are considered compliant. Checks that show convictions or
                                         substantiations of abuse or neglect within the findings that would exclude
                                         the applicant from becoming an approved foster home or approved
                                         household member as outlined are deemed non-compliant.
                             5. A TBI/FBI fingerprint check.
                             6. An Internet Records Clearance for the following registries:
                                  a)   National Sexual Offender Registry Clearance
                                  b)   Tennessee Department of Health Abuse Registry Clearance
                              Note: Any contract provider using an internet service to complete the required
                                    background checks for potential foster parents and/or other adult household
                                    members is responsible for assuring that such provider accesses the internet
                                    searches listed above. Doing so precludes the need for the provider to
                                    complete each individual internet search.
                                       Failure to verify that the chosen internet service use the exact sites listed
                                       above for each check results in that check being considered invalid. This
                                       may cause a home to be identified as noncompliant and result in monetary
                                       penalties.
                             7.    A DCS records check includes a check of Child Protective Services (CPS)
                                  records in TFACTS. When applicable, FPS staff refers to Safety Notice:
                                  Conducting an Efficient and Effective History Search to ensure accurate
                                  search results and document findings on form CS-0741, Database Search
                                  Results.
                                       ♦ Contract Agencies submit their DCS records check request on form CS-
                                         0741, Database Search Results and send to email box: EI-DCS-
                                         Provider.Backgroundcheck@tn.gov.

Original Effective Date: DCS 16.4, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                        Page 11 of 17
Supersedes: DCS 16.4, 3/07/24
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Foster Home Selection and Approval                                                            16.4

                                      ♦ If the adult has resided in another state within the past five (5) years, the
                                        FPS/contract provider staff person or designee requests a check from
                                        each state’s public child welfare agency’s child abuse and neglect
                                        registry. See the Adam Walsh State Contacts for Child Abuse
                                        Registries for out of state contact information. Refer to the Protocol for
                                        Requesting Out of State Abuse and Neglect Registry Checks for
                                        further guidance regarding Adam Walsh checks.
                                      ♦ No foster home is approved if the applicant or any other adult household
                                        member has been determined to have been substantiated of child abuse
                                        or neglect unless a waiver is granted, and the Due Process Procedures
                                        Division overturns the substantiation. This waiver may only be approved
                                        by the Executive Director of the Office of Child Safety/designee and
                                        documented on form CS-0921, Waiver of Criminal Convictions, Pre
                                        and In-Service Training Requirements, Non-Safety Issues, CPS
                                        Substantiations and Educational Requirements.
                                      ♦ Specific information related to CPS findings and records involving an
                                        applicant is maintained in the foster parent file and addressed in the
                                        foster home study narrative.
                             8. Internet Records Clearance, DCS records check, and local background checks
                                are completed for all adults living on the foster parent’s property having the same
                                mailing address. This includes those living in other dwellings (i.e., over-the-road
                                trucks, buildings, campers, mobile trailers, etc.). If any causes for concern are
                                noted, fingerprinting is completed on the individual(s) that prompted the concern.
                                Failure to comply with the requested background checks result in the denial or
                                closure of the foster home.
                                 A driving record check/moving violation record check for each household
                                 member approved to transport a child/youth.
                            10. Potential DCS/ contract provider foster parents, as well as any other adult
                                residing in the home, must report any new arrest, indictment, or criminal
                                conviction (either misdemeanor or felony).

I. Documentation and         1. The application, autobiography, TN KEY training certificate, forms (mentioned in
   Foster Home Study            the policy narrative or listed in the Forms section of this policy), foster home
   Requirements                 study narratives and all supporting documentation (medical statements, criminal
                                background checks/clearances, references, etc.) constitute a completed foster
                                home study. This collection of information becomes part of the foster home
                                electronic case file (refer to DCS Policy 16.23, Foster Home Records) along
                                with the foster home study writer’s recommendation as documented in the foster
                                home study narrative.
                             2. If the foster home study writer recommends denial of the foster home and the
                                reviewers of the home study disagree with the recommendation, all areas of
                                concern noted in the recommendation must be addressed. Regional staff will
                                discuss each concern with the family and work toward a resolution. An
                                addendum to the home study will document how each concern was resolved and
                                attached to the original home study with required approval signatures.
                             3. All completed home study narratives include a recommendation statement that
                                clearly defines the age range, capacity (not to exceed five (5) total children), and
                                gender of children for which the family is approved to parent. (Refer to
                                Guidelines for Foster Home Placements Exceeding Five Total Children in a
                                Foster Home). The recommendation statement also includes information
Original Effective Date: DCS 16.4, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                      Page 12 of 17
Supersedes: DCS 16.4, 3/07/24
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Foster Home Selection and Approval                                                         16.4
                                 regarding the type of physical, emotional, behavioral, and personality traits of
                                 children the family will be most successful in parenting. In cases where the study
                                 was initially intended for a kinship care placement, a statement regarding the
                                 family’s capability to meet that specific child/youth’s needs are also included.
                             4. Foster home study approval information is entered into TFACTS. Any
                                documentation related to the approval of the home is uploaded into TFACTS at
                                this time. Any changes that affect the status of the home’s continued approval is
                                recorded in a timely manner in the foster home record in TFACTS.
                             5. A Tennessee DCS foster home studied in response to a request for the
                                placement of a child/youth from another state pursuant to compliance with the
                                ICPC includes two (2) levels of decision making:
                                 a) The foster home study narrative approves or denies the foster home as
                                    meeting DCS requirements as a foster home eligible for children with
                                    characteristics as identified in item 3 above; and,
                                 b) The foster home study narrative approves or denies the placement of the
                                    specific child or children or youth identified on form CS-0525, Interstate
                                    Compact Placement Request (100A) into the specific DCS
                                    foster/adoptive home.
                             6. A foster home study on Tennessee relatives/kin or other non-related persons
                                being considered as a foster placement for a medically fragile child or special
                                needs child who is in the custody or guardianship of another state’s public
                                agency is conducted by a private Tennessee licensed child-placing agency
                                through an agreed upon contract with the sending state agency.

J. Foster Home               1. A decision on approval or denial regarding the foster home study is made within
   Approval or Denial           ninety (90) days of the applicant’s completion of TN KEY and any additional
                                required pre-service training for applicants to contract agencies.
                                     ♦ Any foster home that is anticipated to be approved outside of the 90-day
                                       time frame requires an approved extension explaining the circumstances
                                       and the expected date for approval. All time frame extensions are required
                                       to be documented on form CS-1018, Foster Home Extension Request
                                       and submitted to the Director of Foster Care/Designee for approval.
                                       Contract agencies do not require Central Office approval in such instances
                                       but are required to document the reason for the delay in approval or denial
                                       or any extension on form CS-1018.
                             2. In accordance with the Safe and Timely Interstate Placement of Children in
                                Foster Care Act of 2006, an ICPC foster home study, with a decision to approve
                                or deny the foster home, is issued within sixty (60) calendar days of the date of
                                the ICPC referral in TFACTS.
                             3. If completion of the study or issuance of a decision regarding the ICPC foster
                                home cannot meet the sixty (60) calendar days timeframe, the assigned regional
                                worker documents the reasons for the delay including action steps and a
                                proposed date of completion. Follow-up documentation is included every thirty
                                (30) days until a decision is issued. Notice of the documentation is forwarded to
                                the DCS ICPC Office.
                             4. The foster home study approval date and the foster home approval date in
                                TFACTS are the same date. The decision regarding the foster home study is not
                                valid until signed by the Team Leader and/or Team Coordinator.


Original Effective Date: DCS 16.4, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                    Page 13 of 17
Supersedes: DCS 16.4, 3/07/24
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Foster Home Selection and Approval                                                           16.4
                             5. In the case of contract provider homes, the decision regarding the foster home
                                study is not valid until signed by a contract provider supervisor.
                             6. When approved, DCS or contract provider staff:
                                 a) Notifies the applicants in writing using form CS-0702, Foster Home Approval
                                    clearly defining the age range, capacity (not to exceed five (5) children total),
                                    and gender of children for which the family is approved to parent. The
                                    approval letter also includes information regarding the type of physical,
                                    emotional, behavioral, and personality traits of children the family is most
                                    successful in parenting;
                                 b) Enters the new foster home into TFACTS; and
                                 c) Upon approval, assist the home in preparing to accept placements according
                                    to the age, gender and type of physical, emotional, behavioral and personality
                                    traits of the children the family has preference to serve. This includes, but is
                                    not limited to, items identified in this policy and the foster parent contract
                                    regarding room and board, clothing, allowance, transportation including car
                                    seats, and specialty items needed per the child’s needs.
                             7. DCS/contract provider staff does not approve any foster parent applicant(s) that
                                do not meet the standards outlined in this policy and DCS Policy 16.3, Desired
                                Characteristics of Foster Parents.
                             8. If a foster family is denied, the procedures outlined in DCS Policy 16.16, Denial,
                                Closure or Suspended Admissions of Foster Homes are followed.

K. Types of Foster           1. Once all the above requirements are met and an approval letter issued, the
   Homes Defined                applicant is considered a dually approved foster/adoptive home eligible to accept
                                placements. Foster home sub-types are defined by the type of placements they
                                accept:
                                  a) Traditional-(short and long-term) non-relative placements;
                                  b) Relative/Kin-relative placement by blood, marriage or adoption, or non-
                                     relative with an established relationship to the child/family;
                                  c) Assessment Home-temporary placement for the purpose of assessing the
                                     needs of children with moderate to high risk behaviors to determine the most
                                     appropriate long-term placement; and,
                                  d) Respite-short-term care of children for the purpose of providing relief to other
                                     foster parents. Refer to the Protocol for Respite Care and other Events.

                             2. Foster parents who care for children who are adjudicated delinquent, pregnant,
                                or diabetic must complete the specialized training requirements outlined in DCS
                                Policy 16.9, Required Foster Parent In-Service Training.

L. Case Transfer             During the course of application, home study or tenure of a DCS foster home, any
                             change of circumstance which triggers a move of that home to another agency,
                             county or region, DCS Policy, 31.3, Case Transfer Guidelines Between Regions,
                             Agencies, and Facilities is followed.

M. Resource Eligibility In order to ensure that federal IV-E safety requirements are met for funding
   Team (RET)           purposes, the Resource Eligibility Team (RET) reviews the documentation used to
                        support the foster home approval decision. Safety documents for Contract Agencies
                        and DCS foster homes are entered in TFACTS and attached to the foster home’s

Original Effective Date: DCS 16.4, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                     Page 14 of 17
Supersedes: DCS 16.4, 3/07/24
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Foster Home Selection and Approval                                                     16.4
                             current home study assessment. (Refer to the Protocol for Resource Eligibility
                             Team (RET).


Forms:                         CS-0427, Child's Medical Record
                               CS-0431, Monthly Family Income and Expenditures
                               CS-0553, Discipline Policy
                               CS-0559, Authorization for Release of Information and HIPAA Protected
                               Health Information TO or FROM the Department of Children’s Services and
                               Notification of Release
                               CS-0670, Foster Parent Oath To Abide
                               CS-0676, Home Safety Checklist
                               CS-0678, Foster Parent/Other Adult Medical Report
                               CS-0688, Foster Home Application for Parenting
                               CS-0687, Background Check History and IV-E Eligibility Checklist
                               CS-0691, Fingerprint Card Information
                               CS-0702, Foster Home Approval
                               CS-0709, Foster Home Monthly Visit Checklist
                               CS-0727, Initial Intake, Placement and Well-Being Information and History
                               CS-0741, Database Search Results
                               CS-0782, Family Eco Map
                               CS-0871, Foster Home Disaster Plan
                               CS-0921, Waiver of Criminal Convictions, Pre and In-Service Training
                               Requirements, Non-Safety Issues, CPS Substantiations and Educational
                               Requirements
                               CS-0932, Foster Home Disclosure Acknowledgement
                               CS-0961 Foster Family Home Study
                               CS-0962 Foster Parent Applicant Questionnaire
                               CS-0963 Foster Family Reference Letter and Questionnaire
                               CS-1158, Foster Parent Individual TN Key Training Plan
                               CS-1217, Acknowledgement of Understanding Regarding Placement
                               Acceptance
                               CS-1221, Waiver Agreement and Statement for Criminal History Checks
                               (VECHS)
                               CS-1227, TN KEY Participant Assessment
                               CS-1228, TN Key Mutual Assessment Process Questionnaire
                               CS-1229, Foster Parent Pre-Service Refresher Training
                               CS-4203, Water Hazard/Pool Safety Assessment Tool
                               CS-4204, Allowance and Clothing Log
                               CS-4256, Vaccine Exception Declaration for Foster Parents
Original Effective Date: DCS 16.4, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                               Page 15 of 17
Supersedes: DCS 16.4, 3/07/24
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Foster Home Selection and Approval                                                           16.4


                               Note: Contract agencies may use equivalent forms, provided the content of
                                     the forms capture the content of the forms listed above.


Collateral                    Adam Walsh State Contacts for Child Abuse Registries
Documents:                    Protocol for Drug and Medication Expectations for Approved Foster Homes
                              Controlled Substance and Medication Work Aid
                              Guidelines for Foster Home Placements Exceeding Five Total Children in a
                              Foster Home
                              Protocol for Re-Activation or Re-Classification of Foster Homes
                              Protocol for Requesting Out of State Abuse and Neglect Registry Checks
                              Protocol for Resource Eligibility Team (RET)
                              Protocol for Safe Sleep Education and Delivery of Safe Sleep Furniture
                              Profile of Parenting Study (POPS) Tool
                              Profile of Parenting Study (POPS) Tool Manual
                              The Interstate Compact on the Placement of Children Practice and Procedure
                              Manual
                              Policy 20.15 Medication Administration, Storage and Disposal
                              Safety Notice: Conducting an Efficient and Effective History Search
                              Waiver Tip Sheet for Employment, Volunteering and Custodial Placement.
                              Home Safety Checklist Work Aid
                              Documentation of the Foster Family Home Study
                              Proof of all Reported Income
                              Results from Police Records Checks


Glossary:
Term:                         Definition:
Driving Record                Each region has designated specific FPS staff who are able to access the Moving
Check/Moving                  Violation Records through an understanding with the Tennessee Department of
Violation Record:             Safety. This access provides DCS with driving records for each foster
                              parent/individual that provides transportation for DCS children. The report shows
                              speeding and DUI charges and other moving violations. In an attempt to keep DCS
                              children safe while in foster care, these reports are completed prior to approval of a
                              new foster home and during biennial re-assessments of foster homes.

Family Foster Home            Is the home of an individual or family that meets all the requirements of this policy
                              and an approved foster or kinship placement that the state deems capable of
                              adhering to the reasonable and prudent parent standard; a home in which a child in
                              foster care has been placed and resides with the individual or family; provides 24-
                              hour substitute care for children placed away from their parents or other
                              caretakers.


Original Effective Date: DCS 16.4, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                      Page 16 of 17
Supersedes: DCS 16.4, 3/07/24
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Foster Home Selection and Approval                                                           16.4



Family in “Good               Any fully approved family that is currently taking foster home placements and
Standing”:                    complied with all on-going training requirements or a family that has decided to
                              close their foster home and discontinue their fostering experience and the system
                              reflects the positive closure reason of “closed in good standing”.

Household Member or A relative or anyone that has an important connection to the applicant via blood or
Significant Others: relation. This would include anyone living in the home and involved in the day-to-
                    day affairs or has access to children placed in the home.

Parenting Role:               The assumption of the primary responsibility for promoting and supporting the
                              physical, emotional, social and intellectual development of a child from infancy to
                              adulthood by an adult member/members of a household. Parenting refers to the
                              activity of raising a child and is not specific to a biological connection. The
                              nurturing parent can be a stepparent, foster parent, adoptive parent or guardian.

Substantiated Report:         Any closed CPS case where a preponderance of evidence exists to support that
                              the reported allegation(s) occurred.

Traditional Applicant:        Individuals applying to be a foster parent for children in which they do not have an
                              existing connection and meet the minimal requirements as outlined in this policy.




Original Effective Date: DCS 16.4, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                     Page 17 of 17
Supersedes: DCS 16.4, 3/07/24
CS-0001
RDA SW22
