             State of Tennessee
             Department of Children’s Services


 Administrative Policies and Procedures: 14.2

Subject:             Screening, Priority Response and Assignment of Child
                     Protective Services Cases

Authority:           TCA 37-1-401 et seq.; 37-5-105 (3); 37-5-106; 37-5-107; 37-1-601 et seq


Standards:           COA: PA CFS 4.01-4.02, PA CFS 4.04-4.06, PA-CFS 5.01,PA-CFS 5.03, PA-CFS 5.09
                     5.10 ACF-IM-16-05

Application: All Department of Children’s Services (DCS) Child Protective Services (CPS) Child Abuse
                     Hotline (CAH), and Special Investigation Unit (SIU) Employees

Policy Statement:
The Child Abuse Hotline receives reports of suspected abuse and neglect. These reports are screened to
determine the need for a timely investigation, assessment, or resource linkage case within the appropriate
jurisdiction.

Purpose:
To ensure reports of abuse and/or neglect are consistently processed for accurate screening decisions, track
assignment and timely response.

Procedures:
A. Screening and              Using the Structured Decision Making (SDM) Child Abuse/Neglect Intake
   Assignment                 Assessment Tool, Child Abuse Hotline staff determines if the information
                              reported meets the criteria for abuse and/or neglect per TCA within twenty-four
                              (24) hours.
                              1. Reports which meet the criteria for abuse or neglect and the Alleged Child
                                 Victim (ACV) resides in Tennessee are “screened in” and assigned to the
                                 appropriate program area and county.
                                  a) New allegation(s) on a CPS case open for thirty (30) days or more, or less
                                     than thirty (30) days when the open CPS case has an approved
                                     classification, is screened in as a new CPS case and assigned according
                                     to the SDM screening decision for track and priority response.
                                  b) When an additional report with any other non-severe allegations is
                                     received, it is assigned to the current Case Manager.
                                  c) If the new allegation is a death or preliminary near death but not related to
                                     the incident that initiated the already open CPS case, a new case is
                                     opened, regardless of the timeframe of the already open case.




Original Effective Date: 14.2, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                      Page 1 of 6
Supersedes: DCS 14.3: 10/29/18
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Screening, Priority Response and Assignment of CPS Cases                                       # 14.2

                                  d) If the alleged child victim is hospitalized, a notation will be inserted into the
                                     referral that indicates the CPS worker or supervisor will contact the hospital
                                     within twenty-four (24) hours of the intake. The Child Abuse Hotline (CAH)
                                     will page the county on weekends and holidays to ensure timely notification
                                     is provided regarding drug exposed child referrals with a P1 response.

                               2. Reports which do not meet the criteria for abuse or neglect are screened out
                                  and documented in TFACTS (Refer to Work Aid 1: CPS Categories and
                                  Definitions of Child Abuse/Neglect).
                                  a) Duplicate reports containing the same information, regardless of the
                                     reporter are screened out and processed. Notification is sent to the
                                     assigned CPS worker via email and documented on the intake narrative
                                     box in TFACTS.
                                  b) New allegation(s) in a CPS case open for less than thirty (30) days (without
                                     an approved classification) is screened out and processed when the open
                                     CPS case is the same track assignment as the new allegations, as
                                     determined by the SDM tool. The assigned worker documents the
                                     information from the screened out report and adds the new allegation(s) to
                                     the open CPS case in TFACTS. Face to face contact with the ACV is
                                     completed based on the suggested priority response of the screened out
                                     report unless waived by the CPS supervisor due to recent contact or other
                                     mitigating factors which must be documented in TFACTS.
                                       Notification of the new allegation(s) and suggested priority response is
                                        sent to the appropriate CPS supervisor and assigned worker via email
                                        and documented by the CAH on the intake narrative box in TFACTS.
                                  c) If the abuse and/or neglect occurred in Tennessee and the ACV resides
                                     outside of Tennessee or will not return within the timeframe to complete a
                                     CPS case or offer services to the child, regardless of the alleged
                                     perpetrators’ access to the ACV, allegations are screened out. The
                                     allegations are referred to local law enforcement and the child welfare
                                     agency where the child is located.
                                  d) If a report is screened out, but involves other investigative or licensure
                                     agencies (e.g., law enforcement, DHS daycare, DMH/DIDD licensed
                                     facilities, DCS licensure) Hotline staff notifies the appropriate agency no
                                     later than the next business day. The name of the agency notified is
                                     documented on the appropriate screens in TFACTS.
                                  e) When a report is screened out but a new request is made by law
                                     enforcement/hospital personnel for immediate assistance, the CAH uses
                                     the SDM to determine the appropriate CPS track assignment if the report
                                     had been screened in. The CAH will then email or page the responsible
                                     county for a Case Manager to contact the referent.
                                  Note: If the worker obtains information that would require the referral to be
                                        screened in, they must contact the CAH with the information so the
                                        original referral can be re-entered into TFACTS with the new
                                        information. The referral is then assigned to the responsible county.


Original Effective Date: DCS 14.2, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                         Page 2 of 6
Supersedes: DCS 14.3, 10/29/18
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Screening, Priority Response and Assignment of CPS Cases                                     # 14.2

B. Priority Response          Priority responses are assigned to reports to determine the timeframe in which the
                              ACV must be seen.
                                   Priority response for all reports begins at intake creation date/time.
                              Central Time Zone vs. Eastern Time Zone: The responding case worker records
                              the response time in TFACTS using local time regardless of the Time Zone to
                              which the report is assigned.
                              1. Priority-1 (P-1): Cases assigned this priority are initiated by a face-to-face
                                 contact with the ACV no later than twenty-four (24) hours, but immediately
                                 if the CPS supervisor deems it necessary. Priority 1 reports allege that
                                 children may be in imminent danger.
                              2. Priority-2 (P-2): Cases assigned this priority are initiated by face-to-face
                                 contact with the ACV within two (2) business days. Priority-2 reports allege
                                 injuries or risk of injuries that are not imminent, life threatening or do not
                                 require immediate medical care where a two (2) business day delay will not
                                 compromise the investigative effort or reduce the chances for identifying the
                                 level of risk to the child.
                              3. Priority-3 (P-3): Cases assigned this priority are initiated by face-to-face
                                 contact with the ACV within three (3) business days. Priority-3 reports allege
                                 situations/incidents considered to pose low risk of harm to the child where
                                 three (3) business days will not compromise the investigative effort or reduce
                                 the chances for identifying the level of risk to the child.
                              4. When a report is determined to be a P-1, Hotline staff notifies the CPS
                                 supervisor by e-mail, page, or phone of the emergency report.

C. Reconsideration            Track and priority response assignments may be reconsidered for alternate
   Procedures                 assignments (refer to Policy 14.3, Child Protective Services Intake Analyst
                              Responsibilities).
                                   During the priority response process, the original priority response must be
                                    met if the reconsideration is denied by the CAH.
                                   After hours P-1 reconsideration requests to the CAH are sent via email to
                                    the Hotline Supervisory Email group.

D. Case Assignment            1. Reports alleging severe abuse are assigned as follows:
   Based on
                                  a) To an Case Manager in the county where the alleged abuse occurred; or
   Jurisdiction
                                  b) To an Case Manager in the county where the child resides if it is not clear
                                     where the alleged abuse occurred.
                              2. Reports alleging non-severe abuse are assigned to the county where the child
                                 resides.
                                Note: See definition of Residence of Child at bottom, especially if youth is not
                                      at their residence at the time of report.
                              3. If the report involves abuse or neglect that allegedly occurred in another state,
                                 including allegations of severe abuse or neglect, and the alleged victim is
                                 physically present in the state of Tennessee at the time the report is received,

Original Effective Date: DCS 14.2, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                       Page 3 of 6
Supersedes: DCS 14.3, 10/29/18
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Screening, Priority Response and Assignment of CPS Cases                                      # 14.2
                                  the case is assigned in the county where the child is visiting/residing in
                                  Tennessee.
                              4. Requests for courtesy response by an out of state agency are processed by
                                 the CAH and assigned to the appropriate jurisdiction. CAH staff obtains the
                                 child’s name, address and all information relative to the request for courtesy
                                 case work activities. Courtesy case responses are documented in TFACTS.
                              5. Allegations of child abuse or neglect involving non-custodial children under the
                                 supervision or care of an individual or individuals functioning in an official
                                 employment or volunteer capacity at the time of the incident are assigned to
                                 SIU. Examples include but are not limited to:
                                  a) Licensed day care facilities
                                  b) Licensed child care agencies
                                  c) Unlicensed daycare facilities that should be licensed (such as a daycare
                                     with more than four (4) children unrelated to the daycare provider)
                                  d) Schools
                                  e) Religious Organizations
                                  f)   Youth Groups
                                        SIU investigates allegations of child abuse or neglect of biological,
                                         foster, or adoptive children residing in a foster home. Reports to SIU are
                                         handled as outlined in DCS Policy 14.10, Special Investigations Unit
                                         Child Protective Services Investigations.
                                        SIU investigates allegations of abuse and/or neglect of children where
                                         the DCS employee is named as the alleged perpetrator or the alleged
                                         perpetrator resides in a home of the DCS employee. At the discretion of
                                         the Director of Investigations and the General Counsel, or their
                                         designees, a SIU investigator and legal counsel may be used from
                                         another region to conduct the investigation.
                              6. Regional CPS is responsible for investigating allegations when the alleged
                                 abuse or neglect was committed by an alleged perpetrator who was not
                                 functioning in their official or volunteer capacity. Examples include:
                                  a) When a teacher/daycare employee abuses their biological child;
                                  b) The custodial child is on a home visit when the alleged abuse and/or
                                     neglect occurred and the alleged perpetrator is not in an official capacity;
                                  c) The custodial child is in a trial home placement when the alleged abuse
                                     and/or neglect occurred and the alleged perpetrator is not in an official
                                     capacity;
                                  d) The custodial child is on runaway; or
                                  e) The abuse/neglect occurred prior to the child entering custody.
                                  Exception: The Special Investigations Unit (SIU) investigates all child
                                              death and near death allegations involving custodial
                                              children.


Original Effective Date: DCS 14.2, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                       Page 4 of 6
Supersedes: DCS 14.3, 10/29/18
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Screening, Priority Response and Assignment of CPS Cases                                     # 14.2

E. Allegations of Sexual 1. Assigned allegations of sexual abuse involving two or more children who are
   Abuse Only               twelve (12) years old or under and are from different families are separated by
   Involving Children       family with each child listed as an Alleged Child Victim and the alleged
                            perpetrator listed as unknown in companion referrals.
                                  a) Children twelve (12) years old or under who are alleged to have used
                                     force, threat or coercion during the incident, or attempted to prevent
                                     communication of the incident may be identified as an alleged perpetrator.
                                  b) A child who is thirteen (13) or older and has a developmental or intellectual
                                     disability should not be initially identified as an alleged perpetrator until
                                     further information is collected regarding their disability.

                              2. The CAH includes any information that suggests a child as an aggressor in the
                                 reported allegation.
                                   During the course of an investigation, a child may be identified as an
                                    alleged perpetrator based on information collected.

F. Companion Referrals 1. When a referral that meets criteria for assignment has more than one ACV and
                          those ACVs have different mothers or custodial caretakers (if mother is
                          deceased), a companion referral is to be created to separate the ACVs and
                          their families.
                              2. Companion referrals are screened individually per SDM and can have different
                                 tracks, priority responses, and jurisdiction.
                              3. SIU referrals will not be split into companion intakes. All ACVs will remain
                                 together on the same assigned intake.
                                      Exception is Custodial Child Deaths and Preliminary Near Deaths. Each
                                       custodial ACV must have their own separate Child Death or Preliminary
                                       Near-Death intake. Unless ACVs are a sibling group.
                              4. Referrals that do not meet criteria for assignment remain as one intake.


Forms:
                              CS-0680, Child Protective Services Intake



Collateral Documents:
                              14.3, Child Protective Services Intake Analyst Responsibilities

                              14.4, CPS: Locating Child and Family

                              14.10, Special Investigations Unit Child Protective Services Investigations

                              20.27, Child Death-Near Death Rapid Response

                              Work Aid 1: CPS Categories and Definitions of Child Abuse/Neglect

                              Work Aid 3: Child Abuse Hotline Tasks and Responsibilities for Referrals

Original Effective Date: DCS 14.2, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                      Page 5 of 6
Supersedes: DCS 14.3, 10/29/18
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Screening, Priority Response and Assignment of CPS Cases                                      # 14.2
                              Concerning a Child Death and Preliminary Near Death

                              Protocol for Working with Hospitals


Glossary:
Term                          Definition

Initiated                     The act of contacting or meeting with the victim or family for a face-to-face
                              interview (CPS).

Multiple Reports              New allegations received by the CAH on open CPS cases.

Priority Response             Priority response is assigned to reports of alleged abuse/neglect to determine the
                              timeframe in which an investigation or assessment is initiated. (See Section B
                              above for definitions and time requirements for initiating a face-to-face contact
                              with the alleged victim.)

Structured Decision           The SDM Intake Assessment Tool guides CAH staff on making a determination
Making (SDM) Child            of whether a report meets DCS policy for a child abuse/neglect investigation,
Abuse/Neglect                 assessment or resource linkage and the timeframe in which to respond to those
Screening Criteria            reports that are assigned as an investigation or assessment. Decisions are made
                              immediately upon receipt of all available information pertaining to a report, but no
                              later than within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt of a report, unless the CAH
                              Director or Team Coordinator decides that more time is needed to gather
                              information.

Residence of the Child The location of the primary caretaker. If the family is homeless, there is a joint
                       custody arrangement between the parents, or the primary residence cannot be
                       determined, the residence may be the last known location of the child, the current
                       location at the time the report was made, or a temporary living arrangement (e.g.
                       hotel, or motel).




Original Effective Date: DCS 14.2, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                       Page 6 of 6
Supersedes: DCS 14.3, 10/29/18
CS-0001
RDA SW22
