             State of Tennessee
             Department of Children’s Services



 Administrative Policies and Procedures: 16.9


Subject:              Required Foster Parent In-Service Training

Authority:            TCA § 37-5-105(3), 37-5-106, TCA 37-4-201-207; Interstate Compact on the Placement of
                      Children, T.C.A.§ 36-1-115(g)(1); Adoption and Safe Families, P.L. 105-89; Safe and
                      Timely Interstate Placement of Foster Children Act of 2006, P.L. 109-239, and Social
                      Security Act; Fostering Connections To Success and Increasing Adoptions Act of 2008,
                      P.L.100-351; Preventing Sex Trafficking and Strengthening Families Act of 2014 (HR
                      4980)

Standards:            COA: PA-AS 2-3, PA-AS 8, PA-FKC 1-3,PA-FKC 6-7,PA-FKC 10, PA-FKC 16-19,PA-RC
                      2, PA-KC 10.

Application:          DCS Foster Care and Supervisory Staff and Contract Agency Staff

Policy Statement:
Foster Parents receive in service training in accordance with policies of the Department of Children’s Services
(DCS) and Council on Accreditation (COA), other accrediting entities, State and Federal laws, rules, and
regulations.

Purpose:
To ensure DCS/Contract Agencies maintain highly qualified and competent foster parents who are equipped
to provide for the safety, permanency and well-being of the children placed in their care.

Procedures:
A. Mandatory Training 1. All foster parents are required to complete a minimum number of annual in-
   Courses for           service training hours, as outlined in the 16.9 Attachment: Required In-
   DCS/Contract Foster   Service Training Chart-Foster Parents.
   Parents
                        a) The mandatory in-service training for foster family requirements, as described
                            in this section, also applies to foster families serving children from out of state
                            if their home is approved as a traditional foster home.
                                    b) Under the ICPC, mandatory in-service training requirements for foster
                                       parents in another state serving DCS children is subject to training
                                       requirements or procedures of that state.
                                    c) Kinship foster parents desiring to foster traditionally will be required to
                                       complete TN KEY and all in-service training requirements.
                              2. All foster parents complete annual training requirements by June 30th of each
                                 year, with the exception of foster parents approved between the period of

Original Effective Date: 11/26/18
Current Effective Date: 3/07/24                                                                             Page 1 of 4
Supersedes: 11/19/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Required Foster Parent In-Service Training                                                       16.9
                                    January 1st and June 30th. All parents approved after December 31st will have
                                    until the following year to complete training requirements.
                                    a) All other adults/caregivers in the foster home that complete TN KEY are
                                       required to complete In-Service training as required and outlined in 16.9
                                       Attachment: Required In-Service Training Chart-Foster Parents.
                                    b) Contract Agency/DCS Foster Parent Support staff members should assess
                                       completion of the annual mandatory training requirements for each of the
                                       approved family members.
                                    c) Proof of foster parent elective training completion not sponsored by
                                       DCS/Contract Agency, or other approved training received through media
                                       such as books, videos or online hours should be documented on CS-1000,
                                       Foster Parent Elective Training Documentation, or on the External
                                       Training Credit page and submitted to the Office of Training and
                                       Professional Development (OTPD) for review and approval.
                                    d) All foster parents will be required to complete a minimum of one (1) trauma
                                       course annually. Parents should choose from the list in the 16.9
                                       Attachment: Required In-Service Training Chart-Foster Parents to fulfill
                                       this requirement:
                                    e) Foster parents providing services to diabetic children are required to
                                       complete the online course Working with Children Who Have Diabetes
                                       within 24-hours of placement.
                                    f) Foster parents providing services to pregnant or parenting youth are
                                       required to complete the online course Fostering Pregnant or Parenting
                                       Youth within thirty (30) days of placement.
                                    g) Foster parents providing services for therapeutic agencies should complete
                                       the required therapeutic hours and courses outlined in Policy 16.9
                                       Attachment: Required In-Service Training Chart-Foster Parents .
                                    h) Foster parents who foster youth with special health care needs are required
                                       to complete Caring for Children with Special Healthcare Needs (2 Hours) or
                                       an approved curriculum within ninety (90) days of placement.
                                    i)   Foster parents who foster youth adjudicated delinquent are required to
                                         complete Parenting the Justice Involved Youth online course prior to
                                         placement and Trauma Informed Parenting Strategies within ninety (90)
                                         days of placement.
                                    j)   Foster parents who foster youth on the autism spectrum or who have an
                                         intellectual developmental disability will complete an autism, sensory, or
                                         Intellectual Developmental Disability course within ninety (90) days of
                                         placement.




Original Effective Date: 11/26/18
Current Effective Date: 3/07/24                                                                           Page 2 of 4
Supersedes: 11/19/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Required Foster Parent In-Service Training                                                     16.9
                                    k) All DCS families with DCS custodial children placed in their home for the
                                       purpose of adoption are required to attend Adoption Preparation classroom
                                       training through the contract agency providing adoption preparation and
                                       supports, when the criteria below has been met:

                                        Termination of Parental Rights (TPR) petition has been filed on or after
                                         July 1, 2017
                                        Child is physically placed in the home
                                        Family has made a verbal commitment to adopt
                                        Recruitment for a pre-adoptive placement is no longer needed, as
                                         determined by the team.
                              3. The following steps are followed for foster parents who do not meet annual
                                 training requirements:
                                 a) DCS FPS or Agency Staff meet with families during their monthly home visit
                                     to discuss compliance issue and develop a CS-0909, Foster Home
                                     Performance Improvement Plan (PIP) within thirty (30) days.
                                 b) If foster parents do not progress towards complying with the PIP,
                                     DCS/Contract Agency places the home on suspended admissions for no
                                     more than sixty (60) days.
                                 c) If foster parent continues non-compliance, DCS/Contract Agency consults
                                     with Regional Director/Agency Director to discuss next steps for the family.
                                     The OTPD is then notified of the plan for the family.

                              1. Staff may submit a CPR/First Aid equivalent waiver requesting exemption,
B. Written Request for
   Training Waiver               deferment, or an extension for the courses listed below to an OTPD
                                 representative for review and approval utilizing form CS-0921, Waiver of
                                 Criminal Convictions, Pre and In-Service Training Requirements, Non-
                                 Safety Issues, CPS Substantiations and Education Requirements.
                               Course:                                   Credentials
                               CPR/First Aid                             Medical and Emergency Medical
                                                                         Professionals (i.e., nurses, doctors,
                                                                         emergency medical personnel, etc.)

                              2. Staff may request for training requirements to be deferred or exempted due to
                                 employment, military, or medical reasons by submitting documentation from the
                                 foster parent’s employer or physician.

                              3. Current foster parents who are certified to deliver In-Service training will receive
                                 credit for courses that they deliver.
                                      Foster parent trainers for In-Service courses are required to have a
                                         bachelor’s degree.
                              4. Foster parents who meet the DCS approved medical professionals criteria are
                                 exempt from the Medical Resources Information course. However, they are
                                 required to complete an online course titled “Medical Resources Information for
Original Effective Date: 11/26/18
Current Effective Date: 3/07/24                                                                         Page 3 of 4
Supersedes: 11/19/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Required Foster Parent In-Service Training                                                      16.9
                                    Medical Professionals” every other year. In addition, foster parents are required
                                    to submit a copy of their medical license or certification for final completion of
                                    this course, here:
                                    https://stateoftennessee.formstack.com/forms/medadmin4prof.


C. Out of State or            Foster Parents transferring from out of state must submit an official training
   Transfer Foster            transcript, official document, or certificates summarizing foster parents pre-service
   Homes                      and in-service training experience to OTPD for review.

                              DCS or Contract agency reviews training transcript, official document, or certificates
D. Other Agency
   Transfers                  summarizing foster parents in-service training compliance. If foster parent(s) are
                              not in compliance, a plan is developed to ensure compliance within ninety (90) days
                              of activation.



Forms:                        CS-0909 Foster Home Performance Improvement Plan (PIP)
                              CS-0921, Waiver of Criminal Convictions, Pre and In-Service Training
                              Requirements, Non-Safety Issues, CPS Substantiations and Educational
                              Requirements.
                              CS-1000 Foster Parent Elective Training Documentation

Collateral Documents: 16.9 Attachment: Required In-Service Training Chart-Foster Parents




Original Effective Date: 11/26/18
Current Effective Date: 3/07/24                                                                          Page 4 of 4
Supersedes: 11/19/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
