            State of Tennessee
            Department of Children’s Services


 Administrative Policies and Procedures: 14.26

Subject:           Child Protective Services Assessment Track

Authority:         TCA 37-5-105 (3); 37-5-106; 37-5-601, through 608


Standards:         COA: : PA-CFS 1, PA-CFS 2.02, PA-CFS 3, PA-CFS 4.03, PA-CFS 5, PA-CFS 6, PA-CFS
                   7-PA-CFS 12, PA-CFS 15.01-15.08; DCS Practice Model Standards: 12-300; 12-301

Application: To All Department of Children’s Services Child Protective Services Assessment Employees
Policy Statement:
Child Protective Services Assessment (CPSA) workers assess risk and safety of children, and when
appropriate, provide services to safeguard and enhance the welfare of children and preserve family life by
strengthening the ability of families to parent their children while keeping the children safe from neglect and
abuse.

Purpose:
To provide guidelines and timeframes to support and direct CPSA staff to investigate and assess allegations
of abuse and neglect, complete assessment and investigative tasks, and render services to children and
families, while producing fair and consistent decisions to ensure the safety of the child(ren).

Procedures:
A. Assessment Tasks
                             Assessment Tasks (tasks are completed within the first 30 calendar days
                             unless otherwise stated):
                             The CPS worker:
                                 a) Meets priority response within the assigned time frame (refer to Section B of
                                    DCS Policy 14.3, Screening, Priority Response and Assignment Of
                                    Child Protective Services Cases);
                                 b) Conducts an initial Alleged Child Victim (ACV) Face to Face (F2F) contact or
                                    Good Faith Efforts (GFE); Reasonable concerns about the ACV’s safety
                                    must outweigh any other consideration of the timing and location of an
                                    interview. Every effort must be made for the interview and observation of the
                                    ACV to occur away from the AP. ACV should be interviewed in a private
                                    setting when possible.
                                 Note: When a DCS child/family is unable to be located through GFE and there
                                       is a reason to believe that the child/family has relocated to another
                                       country, refer to Safety Notice: International Assistance Locating
                                       Children and Families for additional options.


Original Effective Date: DCS14.26, 01/01/08
Current Effective Date: 12/21/21                                                                    Page 1 of 8
Supersedes: DCS 14.26, 7/01/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Child Protective Services Assessment Track                                               14.26


                                 c) Contacts each located parent/caretaker(s) and household members residing
                                    in the home;
                                 d) Interviews/observes all children residing in the household of the ACV and
                                    document the interview/observations. Prior to interviewing any child who is
                                    not listed or identified as an ACV, obtain permission for the interview from
                                    the child’s parent/caregiver.
                                 e) Establishes persons in TFACTS;
                                 f)   Completes and submits for approval, the Safety Assessment section of the
                                      FAST within five (5) business days of intake date (refer to Protocol for the
                                      Completion of the Family Advocacy Support Tool {FAST});
                                 g) Conducts background checks, DCS family history, and other external
                                    historical and case relevant documents, as applicable (refer to Safety
                                    Notice: Conducting an Efficient and Effective History Search;
                                 h)   Links the CPS Case to the Family Case;
                                 i)   Completes and submits for approval, the entire FAST within ten (10)
                                      business days from date of referral (refer to Protocol for the Completion
                                      of the Family Advocacy Support Tool {FAST}); If a child comes into
                                      custody, the Fast is completed within two (2) business day of entering
                                      custody.
                                 j)   Classifies the case. Any cases not classified by thirty (30) days require an
                                      administrative review, documented in TFACTS, detailing the reason for the
                                      delay.

B. Entry of Tasks into
                              1. Each of the following tasks is entered into TFACTS as a separate case
   TFACTS
                                 recording with the entry occurring within thirty (30) calendar days from the
                                 occurrence:
                                  a) Initial Alleged Child Victim (ACV) face-to-face contact;
                                  b) Two (2) GFEs for compliance if face-to-face attempts were unsuccessful;
                                       One of the efforts must be an attempted home visit
                                  c) Subsequent monthly face-to-face contacts with the ACV(s) to assess for
                                     safety; a face to face contact with the ACV is required each calendar
                                     month.
                                  d) Court Hearings; and
                                  e) Administrative Review.
                             Note: Face to Face contacts with the ACV, other children in the home,
                                   parents/caregivers and the AP are entered into TFACTS within ten (10)
                                   business days of the contact.
                              2. Supervisors enter an administrative review to document the review of
                                 completed tasks and to provide direction to the worker with regards to next
                                 steps and case planning (refer to DCS Policy 4.4, Performance and Case
                                 Supervision Practice Guidelines and Criteria).


Original Effective Date: DCS14.26, 01/01/08
Current Effective Date: 12/21/21                                                                      Page 2 of 8
Supersedes: DCS 14.26, 7/01/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Child Protective Services Assessment Track                                             14.26
                              3. The following tasks are completed in the designated areas in TFACTS and do
                                 not require a case recording:

                                      Case Classification
                                      FAST
                                      Case Service Request
                                      Child and Family Team Meetings
                                      Safety Assessment
                                      Family Permanency Plans
                              4. A Family Permanency Plan (FPP) is developed for families with informal
                                 assessments and/or FAST assessment outcomes that indicate a necessity to
                                 provide services or to continue services to address needs, safety or risks
                                 concerns to the child or family (also refer to Protocol for Safe Sleep
                                 Education and Delivery of Safe Sleep Furniture for additional safety
                                 information, if applicable).
                                 The plan includes:
                                 a) Agreed upon goals, desired outcomes, and timeframes for achieving them;
                                 b) Services and supports to be provided, and by whom;
                                 c) Timeframes for evaluating family progress; and
                                 d) The signature of the parent(s) and the ACV, if age appropriate.
                                 Note: For non-custodial and custodial cases, services are documented in
                                       TFACTS on the Family Permanency Plan and/or CFTM Summary (refer
                                       to DCS policies 14.2, Family Permanency Planning for Child
                                       Protective Services Non-Custodial Cases and 31.1, Family
                                       Permanency Plans.
                              5. Signatures on required forms are obtained and scanned into TFACTS, along
                                 with other supporting documents gathered from external sources.

                       During the course of a CPSA case, the evidence and circumstances determines
C. CPS Classifications
                       the classification of the allegations.
   & contacts
                       CPS Assessment Classifications:
                                 a) No Services Needed – An assessment is completed and no risk or service
                                    needs are identified. There are no concerns regarding the safety of the
                                    child(ren).
                                      Cases are classified as “no services needed” by thirty (30) calendar days
                                       from the date of referral, and the case is closed immediately following
                                       classification approval.
                                      There is a minimum of one (1) face to face contact with the victim each
                                       calendar month. There is a minimum of one (1) monthly contact with
                                       each parent/caretaker(s). It is at the discretion of the supervisor to
                                       determine if the case circumstances warrant increasing the face-to-face
                                       contacts.

Original Effective Date: DCS14.26, 01/01/08
Current Effective Date: 12/21/21                                                                      Page 3 of 8
Supersedes: DCS 14.26, 7/01/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Child Protective Services Assessment Track                                              14.26

                                b) Services Recommended- There is a need for services, but there is no
                                   immediate threat of harm to the safety of the child or family. These
                                   encouraged and voluntary services may be new services or existing
                                   services the family is recommended to continue (also refer to Protocol for
                                   Safe Sleep Education and Delivery of Safe Sleep Furniture for additional
                                   safety information, if applicable). There is a minimum of one (1) face to face
                                   contact with the victim each calendar month. There is a minimum of one (1)
                                   monthly contact with each parent/caretaker(s). It is at the discretion of the
                                   supervisor to determine if the case circumstances warrant increasing the
                                   face-to-face contacts.
                                     Upon initiation of services, CPS makes monthly contact with service
                                      providers for the life of the CPS case. Contact may be made by
                                      telephone, e-mail or face-to-face.
                                     If the alleged child victim is under age three (3) and there are any
                                      concerns the child may be experiencing any type of disability or medical
                                      condition, a referral to Tennessee Early Intervention System (TEIS) is
                                      recommended.
                                 Note: If the family refuses the recommended services, and after consult with a
                                       supervisor, it is determined there is no concern of safety or risk, no
                                       further action to seek service compliance is necessary, and the case
                                       should be prepared for closure with documentation to reflect the
                                       decision.
                                c) Services Needed- There is an immediate threat of harm, and without
                                   services, the safety of the child or family is at question. Safety issues and
                                   future risk of harm are so great that the agency provides voluntary services.
                                      There is a minimum of one (1) face to face contact with the victim each
                                       calendar month. There is a minimum of one (1) monthly contact with
                                       each parent/caretaker(s). It is at the discretion of the supervisor to
                                       determine if the case circumstances warrant increasing the face-to-face
                                       contacts.
                                      Upon initiation of services, CPS makes monthly contact with service
                                       providers for the life of the case. Contact may be made by telephone, e-
                                       mail or face-to-face.
                                      If an ACV is under age three (3), a referral is made to TEIS.
                                 Note: If the family refuses the needed services, and after consult with a
                                       supervisor and regional legal counsel (RGC)/ designee, it is determined
                                       the concern of safety or risk, does not warrant court involvement, no
                                       further action to seek service compliance is necessary, and the case
                                       should be prepared for closure with documentation to reflect the
                                       decision.
                                d) Services Needed, Court Ordered- There is an immediate threat of harm, a
                                   need of services, and court involvement is warranted.
                                      The caseworker and supervisor consult to determine risk/safety factors,
                                       service needs, FAST results, and what court involvement to pursue.


Original Effective Date: DCS14.26, 01/01/08
Current Effective Date: 12/21/21                                                                       Page 4 of 8
Supersedes: DCS 14.26, 7/01/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Child Protective Services Assessment Track                                                  14.26
                                       Upon receipt of a court order, face-to-face contact is made with the
                                        victim within the first five (5) business days, followed by a minimum of
                                        one (1) face to face contact with the victim each calendar month. There
                                        is a minimum of one (1) monthly contact with each parent/caretaker(s). It
                                        is at the discretion of the supervisor to determine if the case
                                        circumstances warrant increasing the face to face contacts.
                                       If the Court does not support the recommendation and services are not
                                        ordered, there is consultation with the TL and RGC or designee to
                                        consider other options before closure.
                                          o If an assessment case demonstrates that a preponderance of the
                                            evidence indicates that a child has been harmed, it is appropriate
                                            to consider substantiating an allegation and/or the perpetrator.
                                            (Refer to DCS Policy 14.7, Child Protective Services Investigation
                                            Track and Work Aid 8, Child Protective Services Requests for
                                            Reconsideration).
                                         If an ACV is under age three (3), a referral is made to TEIS.

D. Unable to complete        1. Unable to Complete- This classification is appropriate when:
   and administrative
                                 a)   The ACV or family is unable to be located after GFEs have been completed
   closure
                                      (refer to DCS Policy 14.5, CPS: Locating the Child and Family).
                                 Note: These cases are recommended for closure within thirty (30) calendar
                                       days once GFE’s have been exhausted.
                                 b)   The incident occurred in another state and DCS participated in investigative
                                      activities or offered services, but was unable to gather sufficient evidence to
                                      formally classify the allegation(s).
                              2. Administrative Closure- This classification is appropriate when:
                                 a) Other circumstances, at the discretion and approval of a Team
                                    Coordinator/designee, warrant the closure of a case that does not meet
                                    criteria for any of the above listed classification options.
                                 b) Cases are received and worked as Courtesy Interviews.

E. Removals/Potential
                              Whenever there is an imminent risk of a child(ren) coming into custody, a CFTM
   removals
                              with a skilled facilitator is convened to explore all alternatives to placing the child
                              into custody.
                              1. When an emergency removal takes place before a CFTM can be convened,
                                 the CFTM occurs prior to the preliminary hearing. In any event, a CFTM
                                 occurs no later than seven (7) calendar days after the date of custody. Team
                                 Coordinators (TC) or Investigative Coordinators (IC) and Regional General
                                 Counsel (RGC) or designee approves the decision to petition for custody. The
                                 Team Leader (TL) attends the CFTM.
                              2. Each region establishes a written local protocol to consult with a Master of
                                 Social Work (MSW) or an individual with an advanced clinical degree in the
                                 removal process.



Original Effective Date: DCS14.26, 01/01/08
Current Effective Date: 12/21/21                                                                          Page 5 of 8
Supersedes: DCS 14.26, 7/01/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Child Protective Services Assessment Track                                               14.26


                                  Note: A removal does not always require substantiation. Program staff and
                                        RGC or designee discusses the program’s classification and any
                                        circumstances that may warrant substantiation for non-severe cases.

F. Case Transition and
                       1. Transitioning a case from CPS to Family Support Services (FSS) - refer to
   closure
                           DCS Policy 14.29, Family Support Service Worker (FSSW) Responsibilities.
                             2. Case Closure - To properly close a CPS case, all CPS tasks, tools, decisions
                                and notifications are completed, documented, and approved within ninety (90)
                                calendar days. The final task for case closure includes:
                                 a) A face to face contact with the ACV is required each calendar month
                                    including the month of closure.
                                 b) Complete a FAST re-assessment OR closure FAST as applicable. (Refer to
                                    Protocol for the Completion of the Family Advocacy Support Tool
                                    {FAST}).
                                 c) A closing summary is created to include all the applicable elements of
                                    documentation:
                                      A narrative description of the reason for opening;
                                      Referent contact;
                                      Contacts with parent/caretaker, siblings, collaterals, witnesses etc.;
                                      Alleged Perpetrator (AP) Interview/statement;
                                      Consultation with legal;
                                      Relevant medical and/or psychological information;
                                      Court involvement/interaction;
                                      Involvement of hospital staff in the planning, decision making and
                                       discharge process for alleged ACVs hospitalized at intake or any point
                                       during the CPS A case (refer to Protocol for Working with Hospitals);
                                      Documentation of services in place or referred at time of closure;
                                      Notification to any service providers of CPS case closure; and
                                      Current safety, risk and well-being status of child and family;
                                 d) Complete form CS-0740, Child Protective Services Case Summary and
                                    Classification Decision of Child Abuse/Neglect Referral.
                                      e) If a CPS case goes beyond the timeframe for closure, the supervisor
                                         documents in TFACTS an explanation for the delay, including the next
                                         steps to complete the case and estimated date of closure.



G. New Referrals on          Refer to Work Aid 8 – Child Protective Services Requests for
   open CPS cases            Reconsiderations and DCS Policy 14.3, Screening, Priority Response and
                             Assignment of Child Protective Services Cases.


Original Effective Date: DCS14.26, 01/01/08
Current Effective Date: 12/21/21                                                                      Page 6 of 8
Supersedes: DCS 14.26, 7/01/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Child Protective Services Assessment Track                                              14.26

H. Notifications             Each region must work with local juvenile court judges to establish local protocols to
                             notify juvenile court of every child abuse and neglect referral and summary of the
                             results of every child abuse and neglect case.

I. Safety                    Accurately and expediently assessing immediate safety and the potential for unsafe
   considerations            recurrences are a primary function of CPS’ work with families. The following are
                             Safety Notices designed to support knowledge in specific safety-related domains:
                              Safety Notice: International Assistance Locating Children and Families
                              Safety Notice: Domestic Violence- Facts and Strategies for Response
                              Safety Notice: Significance and Supports for Interviewing Children
                              Safety Notice: Understanding the Difference between Subutex and
                               Suboxone
                              Safety Notice: Understanding Fentanyl and Avoiding Accidental Exposure
                              Safety Notice: Utilizing Medical Records as part of Substance Abuse
                               Assessment
                              Safety Notice: Assessing a Newborn’s Drug Exposure
                              Safety Notice: Environmental Safety: Firearm and Medication Storage in
                               Family Homes




Forms:                  CS-0158, Notification of Equal Access to Programs and Services and Grievance
                        Procedures
                        CS-0050, Case Intake Packet Documents and Native American Heritage
                        Verification
                        CS-0559, Authorization for Release of Information of HIPAA Protected Health
                        Information TO and FROM the Department of Children’s Services and Notification
                        of Release
                        CS-0699, Notices of Privacy Practices
                        CS-0726, Child Protective Services/Non-Custodial Case File Documentation and
                        Organization Checklist
                        CS-0740, Child Protective Services Case Summary and Classification Decision of
                        Child Abuse/Neglect Referral
                        CS-0789, Authorization for Release of Information to DCS: TennCare Eligibility
                        and Authorization for DCS to Release Information to TennCare
                        CS-0827, Non-Custodial Consent for Transportation
                        CS-1031 CPS Case Transition Checklist




Original Effective Date: DCS14.26, 01/01/08
Current Effective Date: 12/21/21                                                                     Page 7 of 8
Supersedes: DCS 14.26, 7/01/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Child Protective Services Assessment Track                                  14.26


Collateral              Pamphlet – The Multiple Response Approach to Child Maltreatment Concerns
Documents:              Priority Response Definitions-Examples
                        Family Permanency Plan
                        Controlled Substance and Medication Work Aid




Original Effective Date: DCS14.26, 01/01/08
Current Effective Date: 12/21/21                                                         Page 8 of 8
Supersedes: DCS 14.26, 7/01/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
