            State of Tennessee
            Department of Children’s Services


 Administrative Policies and Procedures: 14.10

Subject:            Special Investigations Unit Child Protective Services
                    Investigations

Authority:          TCA 37-5-105 (3), 37-5-106, 37-1-401 et seq, 37-1-601 et seq , 39-15-210


Standards           COA: PA-CFS 5.08-5.10; PA-CFS 5.12; PREA: 115.371


Application: To All Department of Children’s Services Child Protective Services Special Investigations
                    Employees

Policy Statement:
The Department of Children’s Services (DCS) Special Investigations Unit (SIU) conducts investigations on
allegations of child abuse and neglect which occur while a child is in DCS custody or when the case
involves non-custodial children where the alleged perpetrator (AP) is acting in an official employment,
volunteer, or foster care capacity. The SIU conducts investigations where the allegations would affect the
employment or volunteer status of those working with children.

Purpose:
To provide DCS SIU employees with additional guidelines for conducting timely and effective investigations.

Procedures:
A. SIU Case Criteria          1. SIU is responsible for conducting investigations when the abuse or neglect
                                 occurred while the child was in custody.
                              2. SIU is responsible for conducting investigations when the abuse or neglect
                                 involves children who are not in the legal custody of DCS, but they are under
                                 the supervision or care of an individual(s) functioning in an official
                                 employment or volunteer capacity within the following but not limited to:
                                    ♦ Detention facilities
                                    ♦ Licensed foster homes
                                    ♦ Licensed day care/childcare agencies
                                    ♦ Unlicensed daycare facilities with more than four (4) children not
                                      including children related to the unlicensed daycare provider
                                    ♦ Schools
                                    ♦ Religious organizations
                                    ♦ Youth groups


Original Effective Date: DCS 14.10, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 5/07/24                                                                 Page 1 of 6
Supersedes: 14.25, 12/01/23
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Special Investigations Unit Child Protective Services Investigations                          # 14.10

                              3. SIU investigates allegations of abuse and/or neglect where the DCS
                                 employee is named as the alleged perpetrator or the alleged perpetrator
                                 resides in the home of the DCS employee. At the discretion of the Child
                                 Protective Services Director (CPSD) and the General Counsel, or their
                                 designees, a SIU Case Manager and legal counsel may be used from
                                 another region to conduct the investigation.
                                Note: Regional staff may request assistance from SIU on macro cases or
                                      mega family investigations through the CPSD or designee.
                                Note: SIU investigates allegations of sexual abuse when the allegation
                                      meets the definition in Work Aid 1: CPS Categories and Definitions
                                      of Abuse/Neglect. Sexual abuse investigations are not terminated
                                      solely because the victim and/or the source of the allegation
                                      recants.
                                Note: Sexual Harassment Classification: If the alleged perpetrator is a
                                      person under the age of nineteen (19) living in a residential
                                      congregate care setting with the child, and there is sufficient
                                      evidence that the harassment occurred, then the allegation will be
                                      classified as substantiated for the purposes of PREA, but the
                                      perpetrator will be classified as unsubstantiated since it does not
                                      constitute an act of abuse or neglect as defined by Tennessee
                                      code.
                                Note: For exceptions to this criteria refer to DCS Policy 14.2, Screening,
                                      Priority Response, and Assignment of Child Protective Services
                                      Cases.

B. Investigative             SIU staff refer to DCS Policy 14.6, Child Protective Services Case Tasks and
   Responsibilities          Responsibilities and 14.7, Multi-Disciplinary Team: Child Protection
                             Investigation Team and Child Protective Services Tasks Manual for initiating
                             and conducting an investigation.
                             1. Home Visits
                                a) A child’s primary placement is considered the child’s home for purposes of
                                   making a home visit (e.g. foster home, YDC, residential facility).
                                b) If the placement has recently changed or the child experienced a move in
                                   connection with the circumstances that resulted in the allegations, the SIU
                                   Case Manager completes the following:
                                    ♦ Conducts a home visit and interviews the alleged child victim (ACV) in
                                      the new placement; and
                                    ♦ Conducts a home visit and interviews collateral contacts where the
                                      alleged incident occurred.
                             2. Coordinated Investigations
                                a) SIU may coordinate investigative activities with other state agencies and
                                   other divisions of DCS that share jurisdiction to include (but not limited to):
                                    ♦ DCS Licensing
                                    ♦ Department of Human Services (DHS)

Original Effective Date: DCS 14.10, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 5/07/24                                                                        Page 2 of 6
Supersedes: 14.25, 12/01/23
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Special Investigations Unit Child Protective Services Investigations                         # 14.10
                                    ♦ Department of Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities (DIDD)
                                    ♦ Department of Education
                                    ♦ Department of Mental Health
                                b) Due to confidentiality, all SIU cases should be presented to the CPIT with
                                   only the following present:
                                    ♦ Investigator(s);
                                    ♦ SIU supervisor(s); and
                                    ♦ Office of Child Safety Management.
                                Note: All other DCS employees should leave the room during the
                                      presentation to preserve confidentiality. Exceptions to this are
                                      coordinated investigations between regional Child Protective Services
                                      (CPS) Case Managers and SIU staff.
                             3. Investigations Involving Foster Homes
                                The SIU Case Manager:
                                    ♦ Notifies the foster parents of their right to access a DCS foster parent(s)
                                      advocate;
                                Note: The advocate is permitted to be present at all portions of the
                                      investigation when the accused foster parent(s) are present. All
                                      information received by the advocate therein remains confidential.
                                    ♦ Reviews the foster home study;
                                    ♦ Reviews any Corrective Action Plans involving the foster home or foster
                                      parents;
                                    ♦ Interviews the DCS Foster Care and Foster Parent Support staff
                                      involved with the foster home;
                                    ♦ Interviews Contract Provider Case Managers when the home is
                                      managed by a private provider;
                                    ♦ Completes the SIU Family Advocacy and Support Tool (FAST) within
                                      five (5) business days of intake; and
                                    ♦ Consults with DCS Legal staff when required (refer to DCS Policy
                                      14.13, Non-Custodial Immediate Protection Agreements and 14.14,
                                      Removal: Safety and Permanency Considerations.
                             4. Custodial Children
                                The SIU Case Manager:
                                    ♦ Notifies the FSW within forty-eight (48) hours of the initiation of the
                                      investigation to coordinate notification to the biological parents/legal
                                      custodian;
                                    ♦ Coordinates with the applicable DCS staff to request the necessary
                                      medical and psychological examinations, referrals for services, and
                                      arrange transportation, if needed;

Original Effective Date: DCS 14.10, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 5/07/24                                                                       Page 3 of 6
Supersedes: 14.25, 12/01/23
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Special Investigations Unit Child Protective Services Investigations                         # 14.10
                                    ♦ Verifies current signatures of required forms in file and complete if out of
                                      date and place in the SIU case file;

                                    ♦ Consults with the FSW and reviews the Family Permanency Plan and
                                      Treatment Plan to ensure safety factors are being addressed;
                                    ♦ Reviews the AP’s personnel file specifically related to
                                      performance/discipline records.
                             5. Non-Custodial Children residing in a Licensed Facility:
                                The SIU Case Manager:
                                    ♦ Notifies the parents or legal custodian(s) regarding the allegation(s)
                                      within forty-eight (48) hours of the initial ACV contact;
                                    ♦ Notifies the facility representative within forty-eight (48) hours regarding
                                      identified services;
                                    ♦ Obtains the parent/legal custodian’s signature on completed forms, as
                                      necessary;
                                    ♦ Reviews Treatment Plan for completion and progress to ensure safety
                                      factors are being addressed;
                                    ♦ Reviews the AP’s personnel file specifically related to
                                      performance/discipline records.
                             Note: For all Non-Custodial cases, a face to face contact with the ACV(s) is
                                   required each calendar month.

C. Safety & Risk             1. Based upon available information, SIU staff assesses the child's immediate
   Planning                     needs to ensure safety and reduce risks. Every effort is made to preserve
                                critical relationships and maintain stability for the child. These decisions are
                                made in conjunction with DCS supervisory staff and, when applicable, an
                                agency participating in a coordinated investigation.
                             2. Using the appropriate formal assessment tool, SIU staff assesses safety and
                                risk by completing a global assessment to utilize the outcomes of the
                                assessment to support decision making as follows:
                                  a) SIU FAST within five (5) business days of intake when the case involves:
                                     ♦ Foster Homes
                                     ♦ Daycares
                                     ♦ Schools
                                     ♦ Youth Development Centers (YDCs)
                                     ♦ Youth Groups
                                     ♦ DCS Employees in their professional capacity, and/or
                                     ♦ Custodial Children
                                  b) FAST per the Protocol for Completion of the Family Advocacy and
                                     Support Tool (FAST) when the case involves a DCS Employee in their

Original Effective Date: DCS 14.10, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 5/07/24                                                                       Page 4 of 6
Supersedes: 14.25, 12/01/23
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Special Investigations Unit Child Protective Services Investigations                         # 14.10
                                     personal capacity and/or a person residing in their home is the AP.
                              Safety concerns and recommendations are addressed following DCS Policies
                             14.12, Family Permanency Planning for Child Protective Services Non-
                             Custodial Cases, 14.13, Non-Custodial Immediate Protection Agreements,
                             14.14, Removal: Safety and Permanency Considerations, and 16.27, Notice
                             of Removal from a Foster Home.
                             3. Custodial Children:
                                 a) SIU, in coordination with regional staff, and Foster Parent Support
                                    determine the ability to meet the safety needs of the child in the current
                                    placement. Refer to Policy 16.27, Notice of Removal from a Foster
                                    Home.
                             Note: In the event of immediate safety risks, regional staff may make a placement
                                    move decision without SIU.

                                 b) SIU requests a Child and Family Team Meeting (CFTM) before moving a
                                    child from the current placement, when possible. If this is not immediately
                                    possible, the SIU Case Manager, the FSW, and Team Leader or Team
                                    Coordinator discuss the investigation and schedule a CFTM as soon as
                                    possible. Refer to the DCS Child and Family Team Meeting Guide.

                                 c) If removal from the placement is warranted, regional staff are responsible
                                    for securing the child’s placement and transportation to the alternate
                                    placement. This includes children that are placed from other regions.

                                 d) SIU obtains a copy of the corrective action or safety plan from the FSW.

                             4. Non-Custodial Children:
                                  If removal of a non-custodial child is warranted when a custodial child is
                                  removed from a foster home, SIU staff are responsible for the removal of that
                                  child.

D. Notification              SIU staff makes all applicable notifications as outlined in Work Aid 4: Special
   Procedures                Child Protective Services Investigative Tasks and Activities.

E. Case Record               SIU case file documentation and organization is conducted as outlined in DCS
   Composition               Policy 14.11, Child Protective Services Case File Organization,
                             Documentation and Disposition and OCS Quality Documentation Guide.
                             Exception: SIU cases are identified in TFACTS under the child’s name.




Forms:                 CS-0826, CPS SIU Notification of Case Initiation and Closure




Collateral             Work Aid 1: CPS Categories and Definitions of Abuse/Neglect
Original Effective Date: DCS 14.10, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 5/07/24                                                                      Page 5 of 6
Supersedes: 14.25, 12/01/23
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Special Investigations Unit Child Protective Services Investigations                    # 14.10
Documents:             Foster Parent Bill of Rights, page 34
                       DHS/DOE Memorandum of Understanding
                       Protocol for Completion of the Family Advocacy and Support Tool (FAST)
                       Protocol for Foster Home Quality Team
                       Provider Quality Protocol
                       Work Aid 4: Special Child Protective Services Investigative Tasks and Activities
                       14.2, Screening, Priority Response, and Assignment of Child Protective Services
                       Cases
                       14.6, Child Protective Services Case Tasks and Responsibilities
                       14.7, Multi-Disciplinary Team: Child Protection Investigation Team
                       14.11, Child Protective Services Case File Organization, Documentation and
                       Disposition
                       14.12, Family Permanency Planning for CPS Non-Custodial Cases
                       14.13, Non-Custodial Immediate Protection Agreement
                       14.14, Removal: Safety and Permanency Considerations
                       Child Protective Services Tasks Manual
                       16.3, Desired Characteristics of Foster Parents
                       16.8, Responsibilities of Approved Foster Homes
                       16.27, Notice of Removal from a Foster Home
                       18.8 Zero-Tolerance Standards and Guidelines for Sexual Abuse and Sexual
                       Harassment Incidents and Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA)
                       Child and Family Team Meeting Guide
                       OCS Quality Documentation Guide



Glossary:              Terms

                       Includes:
Sexual
Harassment:            (1) Repeated and unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, or verbal
                           comments, gestures, or actions of a derogatory or offensive sexual nature by one
                           detainee or resident directed toward another; and

                       (2) Repeated verbal comments or gestures of a sexual nature to a detainee or
                           resident by a staff member, contractor, or volunteer, including demeaning
                           references to gender, sexually suggestive or derogatory comments about body or
                           clothing, or obscene language or gestures.




Original Effective Date: DCS 14.10, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 5/07/24                                                                  Page 6 of 6
Supersedes: 14.25, 12/01/23
CS-0001
RDA SW22
