           State of Tennessee
           Department of Children’s Services

Administrative Policies and Procedures: 14.12

Subject:            Family Permanency Planning for Child Protective Services Non-
                    Custodial Cases

Authority:          TCA: 37-5-105; 37-5-106; 37-2-403 and 404; 37-2-408; 36-1-113; 37-1-166; 37-1-174; 37-
                    1-801; 37-4-201-207; P.L. 109-239 and section 471 (a) (15); Comprehensive Addiction
                    and Recovery Act (CARA)

Standards:          COA: PA-CFS 8.01-8.05;PS-CFS 14.01; PA-CFS 14.04


Application: To All Department of Children’s Services CPS/Non-Custodial Case Managers and
                    Supervisory Staff

Policy Statement:
DCS partners with families, their support systems, service providers, community partners, informal supports,
specific interventions and services to develop a Family Permanency Plan for Child Protective Services Non-
Custodial Cases (FPPNC) during a Child and Family Team Meeting (CFTM).

Purpose:
To identify a permanency goal, develop a plan that specifies what must occur in order to achieve the goal,
what services will be provided, and the timelines for achieving the goal to safeguard and enhance the welfare
of children and to preserve family life, prevent harm and abuse by strengthening the ability of families to
parent their children effectively.

Procedures:
A. Scheduling and            1. The CPS FPPNC must be developed in the context of the CFTM, in which DCS
   Timeframes                    staff collaborates with the family and other members of the team on the
                                 development of a plan that addresses the problems that necessitated a concern
                                 for the risk and safety of the child or any other concerns that warrants the
                                 department’s involvement. This plan specifies the changes required to allow the
                                 child to remain safely in their current placement or return to the care of their
                                 caregivers.
                             2. A CPS FPPNC is completed during the CFTM, which is held within thirty (30)
                                calendar days from the date of the referral if services are needed.
                             3. If the CPS FPPNC goal needs to be revised, a CFTM should be convened to
                                discuss progress. If little or no progress is being made, the team discusses the
                                need to propose a goal change and consider alternative options for
                                permanency.
                             4. If the child(ren) is/are being removed from their current placement, a CFTM is
                                required and the FPPNC goal will be to make a change in placement. (Refer to

Original Effective Date: DCS 14.12, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                     Page 1 of 7
Supersedes: DCS 14.2, 3/08/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Family Permanency Planning for Child Protective Services Non-Custodial Cases
                                                                         14.12
                                 the Child and Family Team Meeting Guide.)
                             5. In the event that the parents/caretakers cannot be located or refuse to
                                cooperate, the Case Manager documents all efforts made to involve the
                                parents/caretakers. If the participation of the parents/caretakers is critical to the
                                safety and well-being of that child and family, court involvement may be
                                warranted.


B. Development of a          1. DCS staff must engage families in an on-going assessment of how their
   CPS Family                   strengths and needs impact the safety, permanency and well-being of the
   Permanency Plan              child(ren) involved. The information gathered from this on-going assessment
   for Non-Custodial            process will guide the participants in the CFTM in determining an appropriate
   Cases                        plan for the child and his/her family.
                             2. The CPS FPPNC includes statements of responsibilities that specifically include
                                both action steps that each party should take and the desired outcomes of
                                those steps. To determine compliance with the plan, parents are expected to be
                                able to demonstrate their completion of the action steps as well as their ability
                                to maintain the desired outcomes in the FPPNC.
                             3. The CPS FPPNC establishes realistic goals for the family, child, and/or the
                                department necessary to achieve safety, permanency, and well-being. It is built
                                upon the child and family’s strengths, addresses the child and family’s needs,
                                and designates timeframes for the completion of actions that helps the child
                                and family to achieve goals as soon as possible. The CPS FPPNC:
                                  a) Have clearly defined outcomes and the specific, time-limited action steps
                                     that need to be completed to reach each desired outcome;
                                  b) Time periods for achieving permanency goals are specific to the unique
                                     circumstances of the child and family and not dictated by the scheduling of
                                     administrative or periodic reviews or meetings; and
                                 c) All services documented in the plan as necessary for the achievement of
                                    the permanency goal(s) are provided within the time period in which they
                                    are needed.
                             4. Specific tasks listed on the CPS FPPNC include observable, measurable
                                outcomes, as well as the names of the persons responsible for the completion
                                of each task. This is to include responsibilities of the family, DCS and other
                                community resources including the provision of services and monitoring
                                progress.
                             5. The CPS FPPNC may be a handwritten draft, but is considered complete at the
                                conclusion of the CFTM. Significant changes or alterations to the goals or tasks
                                on the plan can only be made by convening another CFTM. Minor changes that
                                do not affect the content of the document, such as grammatical or spelling
                                errors, may be made without the reconvening of a CFTM. The handwritten plan
                                may be uploaded into TFACTS for signature purposes only.
                             6. All aspects of the CPS FPPNC are entered into TFACTS within 30 days of
                                occurrence.

Original Effective Date: DCS 14.12, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                        Page 2 of 7
Supersedes: DCS 14.2, 03/08/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Family Permanency Planning for Child Protective Services Non-Custodial Cases
                                                                         14.12

C. Participants              1. Participants involved in the CPS FPPNC CFTM should include:
                                      The child’s parents, their family, family support system and trusted family
                                       friends, community partners, and DCS Case Manager (including DCS
                                       specialty staff);
                                      The following persons are Child and Family Team members as
                                       appropriate:
                                        • Guardian ad litem (GAL); and
                                        • Court Appointed Special Advocate (CASA)
                             2. Children and youth who are at least six (6) years of age and older should be
                                involved in the planning process to the extent that they are capable of
                                participating. All children twelve (12) and over should be prepared and included
                                in the CPS FPPNC CFTM. Younger children may also be able to participate in
                                the meeting, according to their maturity level and ability to understand. It is
                                acceptable to include the child in the beginning of the meeting to get his/her
                                understanding of the situation, explore the child’s needs and adjustment to
                                placement, etc., and then excuse the child for discussions regarding the
                                treatment needs of parents. Exceptions to this policy must be clearly
                                documented in the case record, with an explanation for why the child’s
                                participation would be contrary to his/her best interests.

D. Plans of Safe Care        The Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act states that infants born with and
                             identified as being affected by:
                                    Substance abuse;
                                    Withdrawal symptoms resulting from prenatal exposure from the use of
                                     illegal drugs or the misuse of legal drugs or chemical substances;
                                    Diagnosed with Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome; and/or
                                    Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder.

                             An affected infant will be identified as a CARA case when this information is
                             reported or confirmed by or on behalf of a medical provider. These infants must
                             have a Plan of Safe Care/FPPNC to include services that ensure the safety and
                             well-being of infants following the release from healthcare providers.

                             This plan includes steps for addressing the health and substance use disorder
                             treatment needs of the infant and affected family or caregivers.

                             1. A Plan of Safe Care/FPPNC is created in the context of a CFTM and the Case
                                Manager must engage families in an on-going assessment of how their
                                strengths and needs impact the safety, permanency and well-being of the infant
                                involved.
                             2. Specific tasks listed on the Plan of Safe Care/FPPNC include observable,
                                measurable outcomes, as well as the names of the persons responsible for the
                                completion of each task. This is to include responsibilities of the family, DCS

Original Effective Date: DCS 14.12, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                      Page 3 of 7
Supersedes: DCS 14.2, 03/08/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Family Permanency Planning for Child Protective Services Non-Custodial Cases
                                                                         14.12
                                 and other community resources including the provision of services and
                                 monitoring progress.
                             3. A Plan of Safe Care/FPPNC is created if services can be identified and
                                provided to the parent/caregiver prior to the infant’s release from the hospital.
                             4. In the event that the parents/caretakers cannot be located or refuse to accept
                                the needed and recommended services, the Case Manager documents all
                                efforts made to involve the parents/caretakers. If the participation of the
                                parents/caretakers is critical to the safety and well-being of that child, court
                                involvement may be warranted.

E. Non-Custodial     1. Child remains with parent/caretaker without services (Non-custody) - This
   Family Permanency    goal is chosen when the investigation/assessment has determined that the
   Plan Goals           family is not in need of any services from the department however, the
                        continuation of existing services and the identification of next steps would be
                        beneficial to the family. The child(ren) has also been deemed safe, and there is
                        no need for any change in placement.
                             2. Child remains with parent with services (Non-custody) - This goal is chosen
                                when the investigation/assessment has determined that the family is in need of
                                services, however the child(ren) has been deemed safe and can remain in the
                                home with parent(s). Services may either be recommended or required (also
                                refer to Protocol for Safe Sleep Education and Delivery of Safe Sleep
                                Furniture for additional safety information, if applicable). If services are
                                required, non-compliance could result in a court order to enforce compliance
                                and/or a change in future goals that may require a placement change. See
                                Safety Notice: TennCare Case Management.
                             3. Child remains with caretaker/relative with services (Non-custody) - This
                                goal is chosen when the investigation/assessment has determined that the
                                family is in need of services, however the child(ren) has been deemed safe and
                                can remain in the home with caretaker/relative (also refer to Protocol for Safe
                                Sleep Education and Delivery of Safe Sleep Furniture for additional safety
                                information, if applicable). Services may either be recommended or required. If
                                services are required, non-compliance could result in a court order to enforce
                                compliance and/or a change in future goals that may require a placement
                                change. See Safety Notice: TennCare Case Management.
                            4.    Child will need change in location (Non-custody) - This goal is chosen
                                 when the investigation/assessment has determined that the child(ren) is not
                                 safe or the current living situation is not suitable for the child to remain in the
                                 current placement. This change in location may also require services to be
                                 rendered. Non-compliance or other problems with the change in location could
                                 result in the child being brought into state custody. If temporary removal
                                 restricts contact between a child and parent/caretaker, an IPA must be
                                 completed to address the harm factors and the temporary placement.
                            5. Each CPS FPPNC goal requires the Case Manager, family, and family supports
                               to work toward ensuring and maintaining safety, while improving the family
                               situation and self-sufficiency.


Original Effective Date: DCS 14.12, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                        Page 4 of 7
Supersedes: DCS 14.2, 03/08/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Family Permanency Planning for Child Protective Services Non-Custodial Cases
                                                                         14.12

F. CPS Family                1. The CPS FPPNC is reviewed in the context of a CFTM within the guidelines of
   Permanency                   the policy. These meetings must be separate and distinct from regular
   Planning for Non-            scheduled home visits or face to face contacts. However, if the family team is
   Custodial Cases              meeting for another purpose, the progress on the plan can be reviewed at that
   reviews and                  time. It is then, not necessary to convene another meeting solely for the
   revisions                    purpose of reviewing the plan. The CPS FPPNC should be updated if
                                necessary any time a review indicates that revisions are needed. All CPS
                                FPPNC’s must be approved by the supervisor.

                             2. Significant revisions of the CPS FPPNC are the responsibility of the assigned
                                CPS Case Manager and should be completed within the context of a CFTM that
                                includes all significant members of the team. This would include such revisions
                                as a change in goal, adding a relevant party such as a parent, caretaker, or
                                service provider, or addressing a newly disclosed need. A new approval by the
                                supervisor is required on revised plans. Another CFTM is required to reflect
                                significant revisions.
                             3. Significant plan revisions may be made at any time and are made when new
                                issues hindering the accomplishment of the permanency goal(s) are identified,
                                when there is a change in the permanency goal(s), when there must be a
                                change in the time frame/target dates, or when there is a need for changes in
                                services or treatment for the child or family.
                             4. A decision to remove and place a child(ren) into state custody requires the
                                completion of form CS-0747, Child and Family Team Meeting Summary.
                                 a) A CFTM must be held prior to filing the petition, when there is imminent risk
                                    of a child/youth coming into custody related to issues of abuse or neglect.
                                    This meeting should occur within seven (7) days prior to the custodial
                                    episode unless it is an emergency.
                                 b) Each region must establish a written local protocol to consult a Master of
                                    Social Work (MSW) or an individual with an advanced clinical degree in the
                                    removal process. The Team Coordinator (TC) and DCS Regional General
                                    Counsel (RGC)/designee must approve the decision to petition the court for
                                    custody. The supervisor must attend the CFTM. (Refer to the Child and
                                    Family Team Meeting Guide).

G. Documentation             1. All CPS FPPNC contains specific information about:
                                      Tasks and responsibilities for achieving a child/family’s permanency
                                       goals or outcomes;
                                      Services necessary to make the accomplishment of the goal likely;
                                      Service providers and responsible parties for obtaining and monitoring
                                       the services with identified timeframes, and
                                      Timeframes to achieve the stated outcome.




Original Effective Date: DCS 14.12, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                     Page 5 of 7
Supersedes: DCS 14.2, 03/08/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Family Permanency Planning for Child Protective Services Non-Custodial Cases
                                                                         14.12


                             2. The case record should reflect the team’s decisions, interactions with children,
                                youth and families, interactions with collateral resources, and the efforts
                                towards achieving any/all goals.
                             3. Efforts being made to achieve the goal(s) should also be clearly documented in
                                the case reviews.
                             4. Major treatment issues for the child/youth and family (i.e., safety issues
                                identified in the CPS case, drug treatment, sexual offense victim or sex offender
                                treatment, special education, domestic violence, etc.) that are identified during
                                the assessment process is be noted in the CPS FPPNC along with activities
                                necessary to address the issues that brought the family to the attention of the
                                department.
                             5. The family and participants (specifically those with responsibilities identified on
                                the plan) in the Child and Family Team, receive a copy of the CPS FPPNC
                                immediately following the CFTM.



Forms:                CS-0747, Child and Family Team Meeting Summary


Collateral            Safety Notice: TennCare Case Management
documents:
                      Protocol for Safe Sleep Education and Delivery of Safe Sleep Furniture
                      Permanency Plan Development Guide
                      Child and Family Team Meeting Guide


Glossary:
Term                  Definition
Child and Family      Child and Family Team Meeting (CFTM) is a philosophy that supports making the best
Team Meeting          possible decision in child-welfare cases. The quality of decision-making is improved
(CFTM):               because CFTM includes all of the parties involved in a child's case (child, if age-
                      appropriate, birth parents and their support system, foster parents, DCS staff,
                      community partners and other involved parties), respecting the expertise that each party
                      brings to the table. CFTM's should be characterized by respect, honesty, inclusiveness
                      and work towards building consensus in decision-making.

Family Services       This is a DCS term used to identify the position previously known as the DCS child
Case Managers:        program Case Manager. This person is principally responsible for the case and has the
                      primary responsibility of building, preparing, supporting and maintaining the Child and
                      Family Team as the child and family move to permanence while the child remains in
                      custody.




Original Effective Date: DCS 14.12, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                       Page 6 of 7
Supersedes: DCS 14.2, 03/08/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Family Permanency Planning for Child Protective Services Non-Custodial Cases
                                                                         14.12
Concurrent        A method of case planning in which two permanency plan goals are implemented
Planning:         simultaneously in order to ensure the most expeditious permanence for children.
                  Successful concurrent planning requires a clear delineation of roles and responsibilities
                  through the planning process, full-disclosure and support to the Child and Family Team
                  members and is often utilized in cases where the outcome of a sole permanency goal is
                  uncertain.
Family            Family Centered Permanency Planning is the process by which families, in conjunction
Permanency        with DCS, community partners, informal supports, specific interventions and services
Planning:         reinforce family strengths and meet the needs of the children/youth and their families
                  involved with the Department of Children’s Services. Family Permanency Plans are
                  working documents that address the entire family in addition to addressing the specific
                  needs or behaviors of one or more individuals within the family case. Individuals within
                  the Family Permanency Plan may have different service goals and action steps based
                  on their specific needs. A family permanency plan can include both custodial and non-
                  custodial clients. Family Permanency Plans are developed and monitored through the
                  Child and Family Team process.
Plan of Safe Care A Plan of Safe Care is a FPPNC that involves an infant born with and identified as being
                  affected by substance abuse or withdrawal symptoms resulting from prenatal exposure
                  from the use of illegal drugs or the misuse of legal drugs or chemical substances,
                  diagnosed with Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome (NAS) or Fetal Alcohol Spectrum
                  Disorder when this information is reported or confirmed by or on behalf of a medical
                  provider and must provide for services that ensures the safety and well-being of the
                  infant.




Original Effective Date: DCS 14.12, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                               Page 7 of 7
Supersedes: DCS 14.2, 03/08/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
