                State of Tennessee
                Department of Children’s Services


     Administrative Policies and Procedures: 16.7

     Subject:              Foster Family Recruitment and Retention

     Authority:            TCA 37-5-106; Multi-Ethnic Placement Act of 1994, Public Law 103 – 382; Inter-Ethnic
                           Adoption Provision of the Small Business Job Protection Act of 1996, Public Law 104 –
                           188, Sec. 1808; Administration of Children, Youth and Family – 1M-CB-97-04
     Standards:            DCS 2-106 B, 2-303, 3-101, 3-103, 3-201, 3-202, 3-203

     Application:          Foster Parent Support Staff, Supervisory Staff and Foster Parents


     Policy Statement:
     DCS develops and maintains regional recruitment plans for the recruitment and retention of foster families.
     These plans are developed in collaboration with local community partners, faith-based communities, and
     contract providers and are updated annually.
     Purpose:
     To recruit and maintain a diverse pool of approved foster and kinship families that ensure quality home
     placements for children in DCS custody.
     Procedures:
A.   A. Regional                  1. Each region develops and submits a regional recruitment plan to Central Office
     Targeted                        Foster Care Division, by December of each year.
     Recruitment Plan
                                  2. Each regional recruitment plan addresses the identified areas of need and
                                     consists of, at minimum, the following components:
                                     a) A demographic summary of the children and families served by the region,
                                     b) A demographic summary of the foster homes served by the region,
                                     c) A summary of the region’s general, targeted, and child-specific recruitment
                                        efforts.
                                     d) A summary of the region’s gained foster home numbers and loss of foster
                                        home numbers,
                                     e) A summary of the current regional needs and priorities,
                                     f)   A summary of planned general and targeted community awareness
                                          activities to meet current needs and priorities,
                                     g) An estimated timeframe to meet the need in each category,
                                     h) A plan for engaging more community partners,
                                     i)   Through established base lines, measurable goals to determine recruitment
                                          of new homes within the region,
                                     j)   The type of technical assistance and resources needed from Central Office.

     Original Effective Date: DCS 16.7, 10/01/07
     Current Effective Date: 2/28/19                                                                     Page 1 of 3
     Supersedes: DCS 16.7, 11/7/17
     CS-0001
     RDA SW22
Subject: Foster Family Recruitment and Retention                                           16.7
B. Child-Specific             1. A child specific recruitment plan is developed and implemented by the child
   Recruitment                   and family team for any child in custody for twelve (12) months, with a dual
                                 goal or sole goal of adoption and has no identified adoptive family resource.
                              2. The Permanency Specialist and/or a regional recruiter joins the child’s team to
                                 assist in developing and implementing the child-specific recruitment plan to
                                 ensure specific strategies, time frames, roles, and responsibilities are included
                                 in the plan.
                              3. The Child/Youth-Specific Recruitment Plan (see Child and Family Team
                                 Meeting Guide) is written by the Permanency Specialist and is developed in
                                 the context of the Child and Family Team Meeting. The plan is updated in
                                 TFACTS no less than every three (3) months until a permanent family is found
                                 for the child.
                              4. Within thirty (30) calendar days of a child or youth entering full guardianship
                                 without a permanent family, a referral is made to the Focus Team.

C. Retention of               Retaining foster parents is a critical part of providing service to children and
   Foster Families            families. In an effort to retain them as partners each plan should include, at a
                              minimum:
                              1. Opportunities for foster parents to partner with DCS staff at recruiting events
                                 for families who are open to parent teens, sibling groups and minority children.

                              2. A procedure for foster parents to formally file a grievance if they believe the
                                 Foster Parent Bill of Rights has been violated (see Protocol for Resolution of
                                 Disagreements and/or Conflicts Between Foster Parents and DCS).
                              3. Open door access for foster parents to the Regional Administrators to address
                                 foster parent questions.
                              4. Partnership with the TN Foster Parent Advocacy & Mentorship Programs by
                                 offering training and support to traditional and kinship families.
                              5. Monthly calendars of phone in dates to help ensure accurate board payments.
                              6. In-service training opportunities for all foster parents through state and regional
                                 conferences.
                              7. Annual recognition and appreciation events for foster parents.
                              8. Utilization of Exit Survey outcomes to improve areas of need and to build
                                 strong relationships.
D. Annual
                              1. Prior to annual submission to Central Office Foster Care Division, each region
   Evaluation of
                                 reviews and assesses the outcomes of the current Recruitment and Retention
   Plan Outcomes
                                 Plan to determine which strategies and practices worked well or may need
                                 modified or eliminated.
                              2. A summary of this assessment is provided to the region’s Regional
                                 Administrator and the Central Office Foster Care Division at minimum one
                                 month prior to the due date of the new plan.



Original Effective Date: 16.7, 10/01/07
Current Effective Date: 2/28/19                                                                         Page 2 of 3
Supersedes: 16.7, 11/7/17
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Foster Family Recruitment and Retention                                          16.7
E. Foster Parent
                              The foster parent inquiry process is used to note the effectiveness of recruitment
   Inquiry Process
                              events and to monitor the progress of foster parent applicants. Steps in the inquiry
                              process are outlined below.
                              1. An individual may inquire about becoming a foster parent through the web,
                                 hotline, or the Adopt Us Kids (AUK) website. These inquiries are first sent to a
                                 Central Office Foster Care Designee who assists in contacting inquiries as
                                 needed.
                              2. Each region has an inquiry tracking log that is monitored by the Central Office
                                 Foster Care Unit and regional point persons. Web and hotline inquiries are
                                 entered on the tracking log by the Central Office Foster Care Designee within
                                 two business days. AUK inquiries are entered on the tracking log every
                                 Monday or the day they are received from the AUK representative.
                              3. Regional point persons have 3-5 business days to contact each inquiry in the
                                 form of a phone call, e-mail and/or regular mail. Follow up contact is made at
                                 30, 60, and 90 day intervals. Documentation of the contact is made in the
                                 appropriate section of the regional tracking log. The Central Office Foster Care
                                 Designee monitors the tracking log for timely documentation.
                              4. If documentation on the tracking log is not timely or is lacking, the Central
                                 Office Foster Care Designee notifies the regional point person that an update
                                 to the tracking log is needed.


Forms:                         CS-0768 Child/Youth Specific Recruitment Plan
                               CS-0769 Child Specific Case File Review Tool
                               CS-0774 Genogram Contact Sheets

Collateral                     Child and Family Team Meeting Guide
documents:                     Protocol for Resolution of Disagreements and/or Conflicts Between Foster
                               Parents and DCS




Original Effective Date: 16.7, 10/01/07
Current Effective Date: 2/28/19                                                                        Page 3 of 3
Supersedes: 16.7, 11/7/17
CS-0001
RDA SW22
