            State of Tennessee
            Department of Children’s Services



 Administrative Policies and Procedures: 14.3

Subject:            Child Protective Services Intake Analyst Responsibilities

Authority:          TCA: 37-5-105, 37-5-106


Standards:          None


Application: All Department of Children’s Services Child Abuse Hotline Intake Analyst Staff
Policy Statement:
The Child Abuse Hotline (CAH) Intake Analyst staff facilitate the assignment of reports of alleged child
abuse and neglect from the CAH by reviewing screening decisions and assigning to the appropriate CPS
staff.

Purpose:
To provide direction and guidelines to Intake Analyst staff who ensure that the Multiple Response System is
supported through screening and proper assignment of reports of child abuse and neglect.

Procedures:
A. DCS Screening             1. The Intake Analyst reviews intakes submitted by the Child Abuse Hotline
   Policy Assessment            (CAH) to determine quality case assignments or if a reconsideration request
                                is warranted.
                             2. The Intake Analyst assesses this decision based on screening criteria found
                                in the Structured Decision Making Tool (SDM) along with the designated
                                screening DCS Policies (14.1, Child Abuse Hotline and Work Aid 1: CPS
                                Categories and Definitions of Abuse/Neglect, 14.2, Screening, Priority
                                Response and Assignment of Child Protective Services Cases, 14.9,
                                DCS Response to Allegations Involving Drug Exposed Children, 14.10,
                                Special Investigations Unit Child Protective Services Investigations, and
                                14.17, Resource Linkage).
                             3. The Intake Analyst will utilize any other designated screening tool protocols
                                and procedures that aid in the determination of child safety case
                                assignments.




Original Effective Date: 14.3, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                   Page 1 of 7
Supersedes: Work Aid 8, 02/20
CS-0001
RDA SW22
   Subject: Child Protective Services Intake Analyst Responsibilities                                    14.3

B. History Searches            1. The Intake Analyst conducts a historical search in both the Intake and
                                  Person Search tabs in TFACTS to find any open cases, duplicate intakes,
                                  and previously investigated cases to ensure that a comprehensive decision
                                  can be made regarding child safety and priority response. This is for the
                                  purpose of quality case assignment determinations. Research activities
                                  include querying TFACTS for the following:
                                           All alleged child victims (ACV);
                                           All siblings identified in the report;
                                           All parents/caregivers identified in the report;
                                           All alleged perpetrators (AP); and
                                           All other relevant participants listed in the report that can provide
                                            historical information pertaining to quality case assignment.
                               2. Based on the results of the history search, the Intake Analyst can assign the
                                  intake or request a reconsideration.
                               3. The Intake Analyst provides email notifications to Case Managers and their
                                  supervisors regarding new intakes relevant to their open cases. This
                                  includes Child Protective Services (CPS), Special Investigations Unit (SIU),
                                  Custodial, and Non-Custodial open cases.
                               4. It is the responsibility of the Intake Analyst to facilitate discussions between
                                  Field Supervision within CPS, Custodial, and Non-Custodial units in an effort
                                  to reduce recidivism, provide continuity of care to families and to ensure that
                                  there are not multiple Case Managers in one home/case unless mandated by
                                  policy.

C. Reconsiderations            1. If the Intake Analyst is to reconsider a new intake screening decision based
                                  on DCS screening policies, work aids or tools, the Intake Analyst is
                                  responsible for thoroughly documenting the specific policies or criteria used
                                  to make the determination. These reconsiderations are based on the
                                  following criteria:
                                   a) The information provided does not meet criteria per DCS Policy 14.1,
                                      Child Abuse Hotline for case assignment. This is based on the age of
                                      ACV, relationship of AP, location, and/or an allegation of harm per Work
                                      Aid 1: CPS Categories and Definitions of Abuse/Neglect. This can
                                      be based on the original concerns in the intake, or through additional
                                      information obtained by the Intake Analyst/Field Staff.
                                   b) The information provided meets criteria for case assignment, but the
                                      assigned track is incorrect per the Structured Decision Making (SDM)
                                      Tool.
                                   c) The information provided can be screened out and referred to the current
                                      open CPS, Custodial, or Non-Custodial case for follow up per DCS Policy
                                      14.2, Screening, Priority Response and Assignment of Child
                                      Protective Services Cases.

Original Effective Date: 14.3, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                          Page 2 of 7
Supersedes: Work Aid 8, 02/20
CS-0001
RDA SW22
   Subject: Child Protective Services Intake Analyst Responsibilities                                    14.3
                                   d) The information provided meets criteria for case assignment, but the
                                      jurisdiction is incorrect per DCS Policy 14.2, Screening, Priority
                                      Response and Assignment of Child Protective Services Cases. This
                                      can be based on the original county assignment, or through additional
                                      information obtained by the Intake Analyst/Field Staff.
                                   e) The information provided meets criteria for case assignment, but the
                                      priority response needs to be changed due to the current safety or risk of
                                      harm to the child. This can be based on the original priority response
                                      assignment, or through additional information obtained by the Intake
                                      Analyst/Field Staff.
                               2. If the Intake Analyst is to reconsider an intake based on the results of the
                                  designated history search, the Intake Analyst is responsible for thoroughly
                                  documenting the historical information used to make the determination to
                                  support a request for change in the screening decision for the intake.
                                  Historical information used for reconsideration purposes includes the
                                  following:
                                           Case ID numbers and the date of assignment and/or closure; and
                                           Specifics on how the open, duplicate, or prior case is the reason for
                                            the screening decision change.
                               3. A request for reconsideration can be made based on an agreement by
                                  supervisory staff from CPS, Custodial, and Non-Custodial programs. The
                                  Intake Analyst initiates the discussions between programs, if necessary, to
                                  make a quality case assignment decision for the new intake. The Intake
                                  Analyst documents in the reconsideration tab within the intake the names
                                  and positions of the supervisory staff involved in the agreement, along with
                                  the agreement decision for the new intake. These reconsiderations are
                                  based on the following criteria:
                                   a) Request for Track Changes - When the CAH screens a referral as an
                                      Investigation (to include Special Investigation Unit Investigations) or
                                      Assessment and the Intake Analyst or Field Supervisors disagree with
                                      the track assignment per the SDM tool.
                                   b) Request for Screen-Out and Refer to Open CPS – When a CPS case has
                                      been opened for less than thirty (30) calendar days and does not have an
                                      approved classification and new allegations assigned to a different track
                                      are received, the Intake Analyst can refer to the CPS Field Supervisors to
                                      discuss the allegations and jointly decide if two (2) separate cases should
                                      remain open or if the open case can absorb the new allegations.
                                   c) Request for Screen out and Refer to Open Custodial/Non-Custodial
                                      Case. When there is an open Custodial/Non-Custodial Case and
                                      additional allegations are reported to the CAH, the Intake Analyst can
                                      refer to the CPS and Custodial/Non-Custodial Case Field Supervisors to
                                      discuss the allegations and jointly decide if two (2) separate cases (CPS
                                      and Custodial/Non-Custodial) can remain open or if the open
                                      Custodial/Non-Custodial case can absorb the new allegations. This


Original Effective Date: 14.3, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                         Page 3 of 7
Supersedes: Work Aid 8, 02/20
CS-0001
RDA SW22
   Subject: Child Protective Services Intake Analyst Responsibilities                                   14.3
                                          process is only for non-severe allegations. Severe abuse allegations will
                                          not be combined with any open Custodial/Non-Custodial Case.
                                   d) Request for Jurisdiction Change – When the CAH submits to a specific
                                      county of jurisdiction and the Intake Analyst and/or Field Supervisors do
                                      not agree with the assignment per DCS screening policy 14.2 for
                                      jurisdiction and requests a change in jurisdiction.
                               4. If an agreement cannot be reached among Field Supervisors involved in any
                                  of the designated reasons for reconsideration of an intake, the Intake Analyst
                                  can reconsider the intake back to CAH for reconsideration with the notation
                                  of a disagreement from Field Supervisors on the intake decision. CAH
                                  Supervisors then make a decision based on the reconsideration reason
                                  provided by the Intake Analyst and based on DCS screening policies.
                                   a) CAH makes a decision for the reconsidered intake that could include a
                                      screen out or return back to the Intake Analyst for assignment.

                                   b) If the Intake Analyst or Field Supervisors disagree again with the returned
                                      decision made by the CAH, the Intake Analyst or Field Supervisor can
                                      reconsider the intake to CAH via a Second Tier Review process. The
                                      Second Tier Review process is an escalation to CAH Core Leadership for
                                      review and final decision on the intake. These review requests are sent
                                      via email to the CAH Director and Team Coordinators.
                               5. Request for reconsideration for Child Death or Preliminary Near Death (PND)
                                  intakes can only be initiated by Regional Directors and/or Office of Child
                                  Safety Executive Leadership. These requests are made via email or phone
                                  call to the CAH Director. The CAH Director then discusses the
                                  reconsideration change requests with the Office of Child Safety Deputy
                                  Commissioner (or designee). The CAH Director notifies the appropriate
                                  Intake Analyst/Field Staff/ Regional Director regarding the approved
                                  reconsideration.

                               1. The Intake Analyst is responsible for making the case assignment decisions.
D. Assignment
                                  Intake Analysts consults with field supervision as needed to ensure best
                                  practice with case assignments.

                               2. The Intake Analyst performs an internet search of the provided address in the
                                  intake to confirm jurisdiction and validity of the address prior to assignment.
                               3. When assigning cases, the Intake Analyst uses a staffing rotation and case
                                  assignment process provided by the Regional Director or Team Coordinators.
                                  Intake Analyst maintains communication with field supervision regarding case
                                  assignment rotations based on staff leave and attendance availability. The
                                  Intake Analyst partners with field supervision to ensure assignments are
                                  rotated in an equitable manner.
                               4. If a new referral is received within thirty (30) days of closure of the previous
                                  case and it meets the same screening/assignment criteria, it is assigned to



Original Effective Date: 14.3, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                         Page 4 of 7
Supersedes: Work Aid 8, 02/20
CS-0001
RDA SW22
   Subject: Child Protective Services Intake Analyst Responsibilities                                    14.3
                                  the previously assigned CPS Worker unless CPS supervisor directs
                                  assignment to a new CPS worker.
                               5. CPS Intake Analyst assign cases to CPS staff by the following guidelines:
                                  a) Track
                                      The following cases are tracked as an Investigation:
                                        • All Severe Abuse cases;
                                             •   All cases with at least one child who is between the ages of 0
                                                 through 3 months with an allegation of Drug Exposed Child.

                                           All non-severe cases, except those meeting a requirement in subpart
                                            a will be tracked as an Assessment.
                                  b) Team Jurisdiction
                                      The CPIT team accepts all Severe Abuse cases that are screened in
                                        by all areas of the Structured Decision Making (SDM) Tool.
                                           In regions where there are Drug Teams, that team accepts all cases
                                            with at least one child who is between the ages of 0 through 3 months
                                            with an allegation of Drug Exposed Child. In regions where there are
                                            no Drug Teams, these cases are assigned to the CPIT Team.
                                           In regions where there are Rapid Response teams, that team accepts
                                            all non-severe cases; otherwise the FPP team accepts these cases.

                               6. When an additional Severe Abuse allegation is received it will be assigned to
                                  the CPIT team if it would otherwise have been assigned to any other team
                                  except the Drug Team.
                               7. When an additional report with an infant 0 through 3 months with an allegation
                                  of Drug Exposed Child is received, it is assigned to the Drug Team.
                               8. When an additional report with any other non-severe allegations is received, it
                                  is assigned to the current Case Manager with the open case.
                                           If a new case is assigned to a team that does not already have the
                                            open case (i.e. Severe Abuse case is assigned to CPIT when CPS
                                            has a Non-Severe case), then the Team Leaders will communicate to
                                            determine whether the Non-Severe case is transferred or closed with
                                            the allegations incorporated into the new case. At no point will a case
                                            be closed absent this communication occurring and being documented
                                            in Administrative Reviews in both cases.

                              Note: When there is a case that overlaps with the CPIT and Drug Team
                                    jurisdictions, the Drug Team is assigned the case.

                              Note: The Intake Analyst provides an email notification on all new open case
                                    assignments to the assigned CM and supervisor. The notification email
                                    provided details regarding the assigned intake.

E. Transfers, Out of           1. Transfers from other Regions (with Team Coordinator approval)
   State Courtesy                 a) Transfers of Severe cases are assigned to the CPIT team.

Original Effective Date: 14.3, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                         Page 5 of 7
Supersedes: Work Aid 8, 02/20
CS-0001
RDA SW22
   Subject: Child Protective Services Intake Analyst Responsibilities                                14.3
  Requests and                    b) Transfers of Non-Severe cases are assigned to the Rapid Response or
  Orders of Reference                FPP team.
                                  c) Cases with an allegation of Drug Exposed Child involving a child 0
                                     through 3 months old: Drug Team in those regions that have one.
                                     Otherwise, the cases are assigned based on their severity.
                               2. Out of State Courtesy Requests
                                  a) Severe Out of State Courtesy Requests are assigned to the CPIT team.
                                  b) Non-Severe Out of State Courtesy Requests are assigned to the FPP
                                     team.

                              3. When the court issues an order of reference alleging abuse or neglect, the
                                 request is referred to the Child Abuse Hotline (CAH).
                                       The court liaison can refer the OR to CAH directly or provide to the
                                        Regional Intake Analyst via email.
                                       The Intake Analyst will perform a TFACTS historical search. If an open
                                        CPS case is found, the OR will not be referred for a new intake to the
                                        CAH. The OR will be assigned via email to the open case worker and
                                        supervisor to include in open case.
                                       If no open case is found, the Intake Analyst will refer the OR to CAH to
                                        be entered into TFACTS for a new intake.

F. Additional Intake           1. Intake Analyst may be assigned additional tasks or responsibilities as
   Analyst Tasks and              necessary for the needs of the region as approved by the CAH Director or
   Responsibilities               CAH Intake Analyst Team Coordinators.
                               2. Field Supervision must obtain approval from the CAH Director and Team
                                  Coordinators prior to any additional tasks or requests added to the Intake
                                  Analyst expectations for the Region.
                               3. Intake Analyst will participate in designated mandatory and voluntary overtime
                                  shifts as approved by the CAH Director that may include completing daily
                                  workload case assignment tasks, availability afterhours to field calls and
                                  respond to emails regarding case assignment tasks, back up assistance for
                                  the Hotline with completing non-phone referrals, on call assistance during
                                  Hotline Business Resumption events, and other such teaming tasks that
                                  assist with serving the CAH or the Intake Analyst’s assigned region.
                               4. Additional tasks are secondary to Intake Analyst intake and case assignment
                                  responsibilities.




Original Effective Date: 14.3, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                     Page 6 of 7
Supersedes: Work Aid 8, 02/20
CS-0001
RDA SW22
   Subject: Child Protective Services Intake Analyst Responsibilities                           14.3

Forms:                        None


Collateral                   14.1, Child Abuse Hotline
documents:                   14.2, Screening, Priority Response and Assignment of Child Protective
                             Services Cases
                             14.9, DCS Response to Allegations Involving Drug Exposed Children
                             14.10, Special Investigations Unit Child Protective Services Investigations
                             14.17, Resource Linkage
                             14.20, Orders of Reference
                             Work Aid 1: CPS Categories and Definitions of Abuse/Neglect


Glossary:
Term                         Definition

                             None




Original Effective Date: 14.3, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                Page 7 of 7
Supersedes: Work Aid 8, 02/20
CS-0001
RDA SW22
