               State of Tennessee
               Department of Children’s Services

   Administrative Policies and Procedures: 14.9

Subject:               DCS Response to Allegations Involving Drug Exposed Children

Authority:             TCA 37-1-401; 37-5-105 (3); 37-5-106; Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act of
                       2016 (CARA)

Standards:             COA: PA-CFS 3-5; PA-CFS 9.03


Application:           All Department of Children’s Services Child Protective Services, Child Abuse Hotline and
                       Special Investigations Unit Employees

Policy Statement:
The Child Abuse Hotline screen and assign allegations involving drug exposed children (DEC) and Child
Protective Services or Special Investigations Unit staff respond timely based on the severity of or potential
for physical, mental or emotional harm to the child.

Purpose:
To assist the CAH in determining track and priority response for allegations of DEC and to provide CPS
Case Managers with guidance for classifying allegations.

Procedures:
A. Criteria for              1. A referral meets the definition of DEC based on Work Aid 1: CPS Categories
   Assignment                   and Definitions of Abuse/Neglect.
                             2. A referral meets the criteria for the investigation track when one or more of the
                                following applies:
                                 a) The alleged child victim (ACV) is age 0 through 3 months old;
                                 b) Meets the criteria for severe Drug Exposed Child per Work Aid 1: CPS
                                    Categories and Definitions of Abuse/Neglect.
                             3. If the referral meets the screening definition for DEC (refer to Work Aid 1: CPS
                                Categories and Definitions of Abuse/Neglect), however, does not meet the
                                criteria (in 2 a - b) above, the case is assigned to the assessment track. A
                                referral meets the definition of DEC based on Work Aid 1: CPS Categories
                                and Definitions of Abuse/Neglect.


                                 Specialized Drug Units:
                              1. A referral meets the definition of DEC based on Work Aid 1: CPS Categories
                                 and Definitions of Abuse/Neglect.


  Original Effective Date: 14.9, 12/01/23
  Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                      Page 1 of 9
  Supersedes: 14.21, 10/06/20
  CS-0001
  RDA SW22
 Subject: DCS Response to Allegations Involving Drug Exposed Children                                   14.9
                             2. A referral meets the criteria for the investigation track when one or more of the
                                following applies:
                                 a) The alleged child victim (ACV) is age 0 through 3 months old;
                                 b) The ACV is diagnosed with Neo-Natal Abstinence Syndrome;
                                 c) The ACV is diagnosed with Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder.

                             3. If the referral meets the screening definition for DEC (refer to Work Aid 1: CPS
                                Categories and Definitions of Abuse/Neglect), however, does not meet the
                                criteria (in 2 a - c, above), the case is assigned to the assessment track.

B. Responding to       The CAH assigns a priority response timeframe to reports of DEC based on the
   Allegations of Drug SDM Intake Assessment tool.
   Exposed Child
                       1. Priority Response one (1) is considered when one of the following
                          circumstances are present:
                                 a) The ACV has been exposed to the use, manufacture or sale of drugs by the
                                    parent/caregiver who has recently caused or, without immediate response
                                    by CPS, is likely to cause physical, mental or emotional harm to the ACV
                                    and the ACV is in the care of the parent/caregiver at the time of the report.
                                    This includes infants born drug dependent as a result of the mother’s illegal
                                    use or misuse of legal prescription medication as well as infants who have
                                    been diagnosed with FASD and/or NAS.
                                 b) The parent/caregiver is unable to function, as a result of drug use or misuse
                                    of prescription medication, in a manner that is adequate to meet the ACV’s
                                    basic needs and the ACV is in the care of the parent/caregiver at the time
                                    of the report.
                                 c) The ACV has recently been exposed to the manufacturing of
                                    methamphetamine and/or there is a continued threat of exposure.
                            Note: When CPS staff respond to cases involving drug exposed children, refer to
                                  Child Protective Service Tasks Manual and Safety Notice:
                                  Understanding Fentanyl and Avoiding Accidental Exposure.
                                 d) The ACV has been administered or has ingested drugs (including legal
                                    medication not used as directed) which has recently caused or, without
                                    immediate response by CPS, is likely to cause physical, mental or
                                    emotional harm to the ACV and the ACV is in the care of the
                                    parent/caregiver at the time of the report.
                                 e) Postponing immediate response would compromise the ability to engage or
                                    contact the parent/caregiver or collect evidence.
                                 f)   There is reason to believe the parent/caregiver will flee with the ACV.
                             2. Priority Response two (2) is considered when one of the following
                                circumstances is present:
                                 a) The ACV is in a safe environment or with a protective parent/caregiver at
                                    the time of the report that is able to meet the child’s basic needs. However,
                                    there is a concern that within the next two (2) business days, the ACV will

 Original Effective Date: 14.9, 12/01/23
 Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                        Page 2 of 9
 Supersedes: 14.21, 10/06/20
 CS-0001
 RDA SW22
 Subject: DCS Response to Allegations Involving Drug Exposed Children                                  14.9
                                      be exposed to the use, manufacture or sale of drugs.
                                 b) The alleged perpetrator (AP) does not have access to the ACV within the
                                    next two (2) business days (e.g., the ACV is admitted to a medical unit and
                                    remains there for an extended period of time such as the Neonatal
                                    Intensive Care Unit).
                             3. Priority Response three (3) is considered when the ACV is able to self-protect,
                                or is visible in the community, and one of the following apply:
                                 a) The ACV is in a safe environment at the time of the report and there are no
                                    concerns that the AP will have access to the ACV within the next three (3)
                                    business days;
                                 b) The parent/caregiver’s ability to function in a manner that is adequate to
                                    meet the ACV’s basic needs is not impacted; or
                                 c) The ACV has not been directly exposed to the use, manufacture or sale of
                                    drugs.

                            Referrals received for infants (age 0 up to 12 months of age) born with or identified
C. Plans of Safe Care
                            as being affected by:

                                     Substance abuse;
                                     Withdrawal symptoms resulting from prenatal exposure from the use of
                                      illegal drugs or the misuse of legal drugs or chemical substances;
                                     Diagnosed with Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome; and/or
                                     Diagnosed with Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder.

                            These types of cases will be identified as a Comprehensive Addiction and
                            Recovery Act (CARA) case when this information is reported or confirmed by or on
                            behalf of a medical provider. These infants must have a Plan of Safe Care to
                            include services that ensure the safety and well-being of infants (refer to DCS
                            Policy 14.12, Family Permanency Planning for Child Protective Services Non-
                            Custodial Cases).

D. Addressing       1. If, during an open CPS assessment case, the CPS Case Manager becomes
   Concerns of Drug    aware of new allegations of a DEC, he/she consults with the assigned
   Exposed Children    assessment Team Leader (TL) to determine if the allegation can be addressed
   on open CPS         within the existing open case. If the CPS assessment Case Manager and
   Assessment Cases    assigned assessment TL determine the allegations cannot be addressed in the
                       current case, the assessments TL and the investigations TL meet to discuss
                       the information gathered from the open case in order determine next steps.
                       Refer to DCS Policy 14.2, Screening, Priority Response and Assignment of
                       Child Protective Services Cases for time frame requirements.

                             2. If during an open CPS assessment case, the allegation(s) meets the level of
                                severe abuse, the assigned assessment TL confers with the investigations TL
                                to discuss the information gathered during the open assessment case to
                                determine if the case is transferred to investigations or if the track is changed
                                to investigation and remains with the current Case Manager. Factors to

 Original Effective Date: 14.9, 12/01/23
 Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                       Page 3 of 9
 Supersedes: 14.21, 10/06/20
 CS-0001
 RDA SW22
 Subject: DCS Response to Allegations Involving Drug Exposed Children                                    14.9
                                 consider include the remaining investigative tasks and timeframe to case
                                 closure (refer to DCS Policies 14.6, Child Protective Services Case Tasks
                                 and Responsibilities and 14.7, Multi-Disciplinary Team: Child Protection
                                 Investigation Team).
                                 Note: If the assessment case has already been classified, the track
                                       assignment can be changed by request through the Field Customer
                                       Care Representative (FCCR) and remain with the assessment Case
                                       Manager or transferred to investigations.
                             3. A case open for less than thirty (30) days may be transferred to investigations
                                in cases where ACV’s age limits the ability to self-protect or reduces the
                                visibility by others, and one of the following exists:
                                 a) The parent/caregiver has a positive drug screen for illegal drugs or non-
                                    prescribed legal medications, and the use of illegal drugs or non-prescribed
                                    legal medications impairs the parent/caregiver’s ability to meet child-care
                                    responsibilities resulting in the child being unsafe causing physical, mental,
                                    or emotional harm.
                                 b) The child has a positive drug screen for illegal drugs or non-prescribed
                                    legal medications.
                                 c) It is discovered that the child is exposed to or living within close physical
                                    proximity to where illegal drugs or non-prescribed legal medications are
                                    manufactured.
                                 d) A parent/caregiver refuses to submit to a drug screen, and the
                                    parent/caregiver’s ability to meet child-care responsibilities is impaired, and
                                    there is circumstantial evidence of illegal drugs or non-prescribed legal
                                    medications.

E. Classifying         For investigation cases, the following information is considered when substantiating
   Allegations of Drug allegations of DEC:
   Exposed Children
                       1. A positive drug screen for the parent/caregiver and other evidence that
   in Investigation
                            indicates the parent/caregiver is unable to function in a manner that is
   Cases
                            adequate to meet the ACV’s basic needs (e.g., there is a lack of food, housing,
                            medical care, supervision or proper hygiene).
                            2.   A positive drug screen for a newborn infant or the infant is born drug
                                 dependent as a result of the mother’s use of illegal drugs or misuse of legally
                                 prescribed medication during her pregnancy. This includes, but is not limited to,
                                 a validated diagnosis of Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) and/or
                                 Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome (NAS).

                            3.   Evidence collected, such as a positive drug screen, indicating the ACV was
                                 administered or ingested illegal drugs or prescription medications that were not
                                 prescribed to the ACV or used in a manner other than as directed and caused
                                 or was likely to cause physical, mental or emotional harm.
                            4.   Evidence shows that the ACV was living in or exposed to an environment
                                 where the use, manufacture or sale of drugs took place. The manufacturing of
                                 methamphetamine in the same structure as an ACV is always considered
 Original Effective Date: 14.9, 12/01/23
 Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                         Page 4 of 9
 Supersedes: 14.21, 10/06/20
 CS-0001
 RDA SW22
 Subject: DCS Response to Allegations Involving Drug Exposed Children                                 14.9
                                 severe abuse.
                            5.   An admission of the use, manufacture or sale of illegal drugs or the misuse or
                                 sale of legal prescription medication when the ACV is present or placed in a
                                 dangerous environment as the result of the activity.
                            6.   Assessments or evaluations indicating that as a result of the use, manufacture
                                 or sale of drugs or misuse of prescription medication by a parent/caregiver, the
                                 ACV has experienced physical, mental or emotional harm.
                             7. Any and all evidence collected during the investigation relevant to the
                                allegation, including evidence that suggests the parent/caregiver’s ability to
                                function in a manner adequate to meet the ACV’s basic needs, was impacted
                                by the use, manufacture or sale of drugs or misuse of prescription medication.

F. Classifying         For assessment cases, the following information is considered when determining
   Allegations of Drug the recommendation or requirement for services:
   Exposed Children
                               Parent/caregivers who have positive drug screens;
   in Assessment
   Cases                       Parent/caregivers who have admitted to the use of illegal drugs or
                                 misuse of legal prescription medication;
                                     Other information, such as interviews with collateral contacts or health
                                      care providers, which indicates the probable use of drugs or misuse of
                                      prescription medication by the parent/caregiver;
                                     The refusal of the parent/caregiver to submit to a drug screen when
                                      there is evidence to suggest recent drug use and there is a reason to
                                      believe this impacts the parent’s ability to provide care;
                                     Assessments or evaluations that suggest the parent/caregiver has used
                                      drugs or misused prescription medication and that current use or relapse
                                      is probable; and
                                      The potential for the ACV to be present or have access to the
                                       environment where the use, manufacture or sale of drugs occurs. The
                                       ACV does not currently live in or have access to the dangerous
                                       environment, but the parent/caregiver has the ability to alter that
                                       arrangement at any given time.
                            Upon assignment from the CAH, the Intake Analyst/Team Leader will assign the
G. Drug Team: Child
   Protective               case to the appropriate Drug Team Case Manager. The Case Manager will:
   Services                         Respond to the hospital within twenty-four (24) hours by phone or in
                                     person;
                                    Determine the mother’s anticipated discharge date/time;
                                    Conduct a face to face visit with the alleged child victim (ACV) within the
                                     assigned priority response timeframe;
                                    Maintain weekly contact with the hospital until the child is discharged
                                     (See Hospital Protocol) to discuss updates, discharge planning, family
                                     involvement;

 Original Effective Date: 14.9, 12/01/23
 Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                      Page 5 of 9
 Supersedes: 14.21, 10/06/20
 CS-0001
 RDA SW22
Subject: DCS Response to Allegations Involving Drug Exposed Children                                        14.9

                                   Complete the investigative process and begin discharge planning with the
                                    parent(s), infant, third party caretakers, hospital and/or any other involved
                                    parties on the initial day of contact;
                                   A home visit will be conducted prior to discharge, review safe sleep with
                                    all family members and observe the sleeping arrangements for the infant
                                    (to be completed each month);
                                          • If an infant is discharged home prior to making response, Safe Sleep is
                                            assessed during the first home visit and monthly thereafter.
                                          • If notification of infant discharge from a hospital is received prior to
                                            completion of a home visit, a home visit will be conducted including
                                            assessment of safe sleep.
                                   Conduct a Child and Family Team Meeting (CFTM) at the hospital when
                                    possible/necessary;
                                          • The Drug Team Case Manager includes in the invitation to the CFTM
                                            those partner agencies involved with the following programs where
                                            applicable:
                                            o Single Team/Single Plan
                                            o Multi-Agency Collaborative
                                       o Safe Baby Court
                                   Complete a Plan of Safe Care (Non-Custodial/Family Permanency Plan,
                                    (refer to DCS Policy 14.12, Family Permanency Planning for Child
                                    Protective Services Non-Custodial Cases);
                                          • A Plan of Safe Care is not required in TFACTS with supervisory
                                            approval in consultation with regional legal counsel when:
                                            o The family refuses services;
                                            o Intervening family or court action occurs.

                                   Refer parent(s) for any identified services, including but not limited to an
                                    Alcohol and Drug Assessment, when needed;
                                   If the investigation requires court involvement or removal into a third-party
                                    placement, the Case Manager should schedule a CFTM to include the
                                    Family Support Services (FSS), if applicable;
                                          • DEC Case Manager may refer for services prior to the CFTM, in which
                                            case the provider should be included in the CFTM.


                                          • Team members will use the Non-Custodial/Family Permanency Plan
                                            for the Plan of Safe Care which is also used in the Single Team/Single
                                            Plan approach, when appropriate.


Original Effective Date: 14.9, 12/01/23
Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                             Page 6 of 9
Supersedes: 14.21, 10/06/20
CS-0001
RDA SW22
 Subject: DCS Response to Allegations Involving Drug Exposed Children                                  14.9
                                   Refer to the Drug Exposed Child FSS team when services are
                                     implemented and there is a need for long term case management of the
                                     services
                                 Note: Not all cases transferred to FSS team will require court involvement or
                                       DCS paid services.
                      1. Drug Team FSS Case Managers and supervisors reference DCS Policy 14.18,
H . Drug Team: Family
    Support Services     Family Support Services Program except for provided below.
    (FSS)             2. The FSS TL and Drug Exposed Child TL in the region/unit will identify cases for
                         transfer to FSS and will discuss by phone/email/face to face meeting. The TLs
                         will ensure the cases meet criteria and agree on those cases for transfer.
                                 a)   Criteria for Transfer to FSS-A minimum of one criterion must be met:
                                       FAST score of moderate or high risk;
                                       Court involvement or court request for continued services;
                                       A removal from the parent(s) or caregiver and placement with a third
                                        party with services identified or in place, and may include an Immediate
                                        Protective Agreement (IPA);
                                       Services can be paid by DCS or community based and initiated to
                                        reduce the risk of harm and/or the risk of custody; or
                                       FAST score of minimal BUT including at least one of the above criteria.

                                 b)   Once the TLs determine the case will be transferred to FSS, a CFTM will
                                      be conducted to transfer the case to the FSS Case Manager.
                                 c)   Assigned Case Manager will complete the referral process for services
                                      when identified as follows:

                                        Submit a Case Service Request (CSR) request by completing the CSR
                                         form for any service needs;
                                        Complete the Release of Information, CS-0559, if necessary, and
                                         uploaded in TFACTS;
                                        Enter any requests in TFACTS;
                                        Monthly progress of the assigned case to include compliance with court
                                         orders and accomplishment of goals on Permanency Plan or Plan of
                                         Safe Care and document in TFACTS;
                                        Entry of the FAST reassessment to meet compliance with DCS Policy;
                                        Review and upload into TFACTS monthly provider reports and enter the
                                         Plan of Safe Care into TFACTS;
                                        Face to Face Home visit conducted monthly (within each calendar
                                         month) with the child in their current placement and safe sleep will be
                                         reviewed and observed;
                                        Face to Face visit with the parent and/or third-party caretaker must be

 Original Effective Date: 14.9, 12/01/23
 Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                       Page 7 of 9
 Supersedes: 14.21, 10/06/20
 CS-0001
 RDA SW22
 Subject: DCS Response to Allegations Involving Drug Exposed Children                                14.9
                                           conducted monthly (within each calendar month);
                                        During face to face visits with the caretakers (to include
                                         parents/caretaker) a review of the Plan of Safe Care/Non-Custodial
                                         Permanency Plans will be conducted and reviewed for compliance.
                                         This will be documented in TFACTs.
                                        Prior to a recommendation of a child being returned to a home where
                                         the child was removed from, a home visit must be conducted.
                                       In the event of a severe abuse case, DCS Policy 16.12, Severe Abuse
                                        Review will be followed, prior to recommendation of return to
                                        parent/caretaker.
                                 d) The FSS Case Manager will close the case upon completion of services
                                    with supervisory approval and in compliance with any court involvement.
                                 e) Case Reviews with the TL, Team Coordinator (TC) and CPS
                                    Director/designee are conducted at day 120, 180 and quarterly thereafter to
                                    discuss:
                                     Engagement with the family;
                                     Efforts to locate missing family members;
                                      Ongoing service compliance;

                                      Court Action with DCS legal representative; and
                                      System barriers.
                              Refer to DCS Policy 14.6, Child Protective Services Case Tasks and
I. CPS Tasks and
   Responsibilities           Responsibilities and associated Work Aids referred to in those policies for a
                              complete list of all the tasks associated with conducting CPS investigations and
                              assessments including those specifically addressing allegations of drug exposed
                              child.


Forms:                   CS-0680, Child Protective Services Intake
                         CS-0050, Case Intake Documents and Native American Heritage Verification
                         CS-4234, Office of Child Safety Regional Drug Team Quality Assurance Review




 Original Effective Date: 14.9, 12/01/23
 Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                    Page 8 of 9
 Supersedes: 14.21, 10/06/20
 CS-0001
 RDA SW22
  Subject: DCS Response to Allegations Involving Drug Exposed Children                                14.9

Collateral                Work Aid 1: CPS Categories and Definitions of Abuse/Neglect
Documents:
                          14.2, Screening Priority Response and Assignment of Child Protective Services
                          Cases
                          14.6, Child Protective Services Case Tasks and Responsibilities
                          14.7, Multi-Disciplinary Team: Child Protection Investigation Team
                          14.12, Family Permanency Planning for CPS Non-Custodial Cases
                          14.18, Family Support Services Program
                          16.12, Severe Abuse Review
                          Child Protective Services Tasks Manual
                          Safety Notice: Understanding Fentanyl and Avoiding Accidental Exposure
                          Controlled Substance and Medication Work Aid


Glossary:
Term                      Definition
Fetal Alcohol             Fetal Alcohol Spectrum disorders are a group of conditions that can occur in a person
Spectrum Disorder         whose mother drank alcohol during pregnancy. These effects can include physical
(FASD)                    problems and problems with behavior and learning. Often a person with FASD has a
                          mix of these problems.
Neonatal                  Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome is a condition in which a baby has withdrawal
Abstinence                symptoms after being exposed to certain substances. Many times, the baby is
Syndrome                  exposed when the mother uses substances such as medications or illicit drugs during
(NAS):                    pregnancy and after the baby is born (and separated from the mother’s body), the
                          baby goes through withdrawal because it is no longer receiving the substances. Less
                          commonly, very sick babies may receive medications after birth to help control pain
                          or agitation, and once those medications are stopped, the baby may go through
                          withdrawal.
                          Medications that may cause withdrawal include those known as opioids (painkillers)
                          or benzodiazepines (which help with anxiety or sleep). Illegal drugs such as cocaine
                          may also cause withdrawal. Withdrawal can occur when a mother is using a
                          medication as prescribed, (e.g., a mother who is receiving legally prescribed
                          medication for pain or addiction); when a mother is misusing a prescription
                          medication (e.g., using the medication too much or too often and/or taking a
                          medication not prescribed to her); or the use of illegal drugs (Reference Tennessee
                          Department of Health: https://www.tn.gov/health/nas.html).
Self-Protect              The degrees to which a child can avoid, negate, or modify the impact of safety
                          threats.
Visibility                Reference to the child’s ability to be seen by others outside the care of the alleged
                          perpetrator.
Vulnerability             Reference to the child’s capacity to self-protect as related to age, disability,
                          susceptibility to maltreatment, and visibility by others.



  Original Effective Date: 14.9, 12/01/23
  Current Effective Date: 12/01/23                                                                     Page 9 of 9
  Supersedes: 14.21, 10/06/20
  CS-0001
  RDA SW22
