            State of Tennessee
            Department of Children’s Services


Administrative Policies and Procedures: 16.11

Subject:               Shared Foster Homes

Authority:             TCA 36-1-101–142, 36-1-201, 37-4-201 et seq, 37-5-105, 37-5-106, 39-17-1315;
                       Interstate Compact on the Placement of Children (ICPC); Adam Walsh Child
                       Protection and Safety Act of 2006, HR 4472; Adoption and Safe Families, P.L. 105-89;
                       Safe and Timely Interstate Placement of Foster Children Act of 2006,P.L. 109-239 and
                       the Social Security Act; Fostering Connections To Success and Increasing Adoptions
                       Act of 2008, P.L. 110-351

Standards:              COA: PA-FC 6.01, PA-FC 6.02


Application:           All Department of Children’s Services Foster Care Employees, Supervisory Employees
                       and Contract Provider Agency Employees

Policy Statement:
The Department of Children's Services (DCS) and active Contract Providers may agree to share foster
homes for children in state custody. Tennessee foster homes that are identified through the Interstate
Compact on the Placement of Children (ICPC) process as a proposed placement for children, who are in
the custody/guardianship of another State or agency, may be a current approved foster home as outlined
in DCS policy. A foster home may also be an approved foster home through a Contract Provider, or may
become a shared foster home as defined in this policy and subject to application of this policy.

Purpose:
To provide guidelines and establish collaborative processes that enable custodial children and siblings to
stay together and remain in a safe and nurturing home.

Procedures:
A. Shared Home               1. Contract Provider homes may be used as shared homes due to the special
   Agreement                    needs of the child being placed in the home. Individual situations (such as the
                                need for sibling placements) can be reviewed by the Team Coordinator of the
                                Foster Parent Support Unit or Central office as needed.
                             2. A foster home must not provide placements for both DCS and the contract
                                provider without a written agreement delineating the responsibilities of both
                                parties involved and approved by the Regional Administrator/designee and the
                                Director of the Contract Provider Agency. (Refer to Protocol for Re-
                                Activation or Re-Classification of Foster Homes.)
                             3. Shared homes may only be affiliated with one (1) contract agency provider.

B. Fiscal Procedures         1. The Department or the Contract Provider, that originally approved the foster
   for Shared Home              home, must provide a copy of the family’s home study case file to DCS or the
   Agreements                   sharing agency, to be reviewed for compliance with all areas outlined in this
Original Effective Date: 01/01/07
Current Effective Date: 03/29/18                                                                      Page 1 of 3
Supersedes: 01/12/17
CS-0001
SW22
Subject: Shared Foster Homes                                                               16.11
                                    policy and DCS policies, 16.3, Desired Characteristics of Foster Parents
                                    and 16.4 Foster Home Selection and Approval.
                             2. The results of the home study review are documented in the foster home case
                                file along with the recommendation of the staff reviewer. The DCS Team
                                Leader (TL) or Contract Provider Supervisor also notes their recommendation
                                and secures the approval of the Regional Administrator/ designee and the
                                Contract Provider Director.
                             3. Both the Department and the Contract Provider Agency must sign in
                                agreement form CS-0672, Shared Home Authorization.
                             4. The assigned regional DCS employee/designee is responsible for completing
                                all fiscal procedures to ensure the family receives their foster home board
                                payment.
                             5. These homes must be paid the same rate structure as any other DCS foster
                                home.
                             6. Special or extraordinary foster home board rates must be requested and
                                approved by the appropriate DCS staff in accordance with DCS Policy 16.29,
                                Foster Home Board Rates.

C. Shared Home               1.     The child casework responsibilities remain with the DCS Family Service
   Maintenance                      Worker (FSW) or Contract Provider staff who is responsible for each child.
                             2.     The home study re-assessment is the responsibility of the Contract Provider
                                    to ensure that the family continues to meet all the requirements outlined in
                                    DCS Policy 16.8, Responsibilities of Approved Foster Homes and the
                                    requirements of the Contract Provider agency.
                             3.     If both DCS and the Contract Provider agree that the foster home may be
                                    shared, the DCS FSW ensures that the foster home is entered into the foster
                                    home section of TFACTS as a shared home as outlined in the Protocol for
                                    Re-assessment or Re-classification of Foster Homes. During the length
                                    of the shared agreement, DCS is responsible for entering all documentation
                                    into TFACTS.
                             4.     An approved re-assessment through a Contract Provider means continued
                                    approval as a DCS foster home. The Contract Provider must provide DCS
                                    with copies of the family’s annual re-assessments upon completion.
                             5.     The re-assessment is the responsibility of the Contract Provider because the
                                    training requirements are greater for therapeutic homes and a shared home
                                    would have to maintain their approval with the Contract Provider agency and
                                    DCS.

D. ICPC Cases                1.     For the purposes of ICPC, public agency requests for a foster/adoptive home
                                    study are routinely assigned to the public agency in the receiving state. In
                                    Tennessee, such assignments are made to Regional Foster Parent Support
                                    staff. Refer to the ICPC Practice and Procedure Manual regarding types of
                                    home study requests.
                             2.     If the family is an approved foster home for a Contract Provider and wishes
                                    to remain with the agency a Share Home Agreement may be negotiated as
                                    outlined by this policy. If the Contract Provider or the family does not agree
Original Effective Date: 01/01/07
Current Effective Date: 03/29/18                                                                         Page 2 of 3
Supersedes: 01/12/17
CS-0001
SW22
Subject: Shared Foster Homes                                                                16.11
                                    to become a shared home the sending state must contract directly with the
                                    Contract Provider.
                             3.     Financial obligation is the responsibility of the sending state for a child/youth
                                    placed in an approved foster home in Tennessee. DCS is not responsible to
                                    provide foster home board payments.



Forms:                      CS-0672 Shared Home Authorization



Collateral                  Protocol for Re-Activation or Re-Classification of Foster Homes
Documents:                  ICPC Practice and Procedure Manual




Original Effective Date: 01/01/07
Current Effective Date: 03/29/18                                                                           Page 3 of 3
Supersedes: 01/12/17
CS-0001
SW22
