             State of Tennessee
             Department of Children’s Services


 Administrative Policies and Procedures: 16.3

Subject:              Desired Characteristics of Foster Parents
                      TCA 37-4-201-207; Interstate Compact on the Placement of Children, TCA 37-5-105(3),
Authority:            37-5-106, 37-4-201 et seq., 36-1-201 et seq.
                      Adoption and Safe Families Act-P. L. 105-89, Safe and Timely Interstate Placement Act
                      of Children in Foster Care Act of 2006 - P.L. 109-239, Social Security Act and
                      Preventing Sex Trafficking and Strengthening Families Act of 2014 (HR 4980).

Standards:            COA: PA-CR I,PA-CFS 22-23


Application:          All DCS Foster Care and Supervisory Staff and Contract Agency Staff

Policy Statement:
The Department of Children’s Services (DCS), Interstate Compact on the Placement of Children (ICPC) and
DCS Contract Agencies, identify desired characteristics of foster parents to ensure the safety, permanency,
and well-being of children/youth served. DCS also sets standards of approval for its foster parents to
increase the likelihood of their success in meeting the needs of the children/youth placed in their homes.

Purpose:
The procedures in this policy are for use as a guide in recruiting prospective foster parents.

Procedures:
A. Family Composition 1. Married or single persons may apply to become foster parents. All
                         prospective foster parents are approved based on their ability to meet the
                         needs of children/youth in foster care.
                             2. Potential foster parent’s birth and adoptive children/youth are interviewed and
                                involved in the mutual selection process. Their needs and strengths will be
                                considered during the approval process of the family.
                             3. Any other household members are also interviewed and involved in the
                                mutual selection process in terms of how they might be affected by or have an
                                effect upon the child/youth that might be placed in the home.

B. Age and Health            1. The foster parents must be at least twenty one (21) years of age and must be
   Requirements                 both physically and emotionally healthy enough to carry out the duties of a
                                foster parent (Relatives age eighteen (18) or older may be considered to
                                become foster parents for a sibling or other blood relative).
                             2. The age and/or health of potential foster parents are considered primarily as it
                                affects the parent’s physical energy, emotional capability, maturity, flexibility,
                                and ability to care for and provide permanency for a specific child/youth.
                             3. All household members (adults and children) must have up-to-date pertussis
                                (whooping cough) and influenza vaccines to foster children under the age of
Original Effective Date: DCS 16.3, 07/01/00 and 07/15/02
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                        Page 1 of 5
Supersedes: DCS 16.3, 8/03/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Desired Characteristics of Foster Parents                                                         16.3
                                 eighteen (18) months old or with significant documented medical needs.
                                 Foster parents may request exemption from this requirement on the basis of
                                 religious or moral convictions. To request exemption, the foster parent
                                 completes CS-4256, Vaccine Exception Declaration for Foster Parents
                                 and provides the document to their Foster Parent Support (FPS) worker or
                                 contract agency provider, who ensures the document is scanned into TFACTS
                                 in the documents section of the foster parent’s person home page.


C. Smoking and Health Foster parents and their guests will not smoke, vape, or use other forms of e-
   Quality Issues     cigarettes or smokeless tobacco inside the home or during transportation of a
                      child in foster care. Precautions will be put in place to protect children from
                      second hand smoke. Children/youth who are medically fragile, or who experience
                      asthma or other breathing-related medical conditions, are not placed into homes
                      with foster parents who smoke.

D. Quality of                Potential foster parents must have demonstrated the ability to build trusting and
   Relationships             stable relationships with other persons including spouse, significant others,
                             children, extended family members or friends. In the home study process, the
                             quality of past and current significant relationships is assessed.

E. Stability                 1. The prospective foster family’s income must be stable and sufficient enough
                                to meet their family’s needs. Expenditures cannot be such that there is a
                                reliance on foster care payment to sustain the household. Families approved
                                by Central Office to serve as a professional foster parent, may be exempt
                                from this requirement as appropriate.
                             2. Any applicant that lives in governmental housing or receives a government
                                subsidy/benefit will not be excluded based solely on these situations.
                                Consideration is given to:
                                   Physical safety and the environment of the home;
                                   Each applicant’s ability to parent children/youth involved with the child
                                    welfare system; and
                                   Ability to meet their daily expenditures, without the dependence on the
                                    foster care board payment.
                             3. Form CS-0431, Monthly Family Income and Expenditures, is completed to
                                demonstrate income stability and applicants provide verification of all reported
                                income.
                                 The family residence must appear structurally sound and the family should
                                 have maintained a stable address without frequent unjustified moves.

F. Transportation            Routine travel is included in the daily foster home board payment; therefore the
                             foster parent should have reliable transportation to include a variety of trips such
                             as: school meetings, Child and Family Team Meetings, family visits, doctor’s
                             appointments, family visitation, court, Foster Care Review Board, etc. which is
                             influenced by the individual needs and activities of the child/youth in the home.



Original Effective Date: DCS 16.3, 07/01/00 and 07/15/02
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                        Page 2 of 5
Supersedes: DCS 16.3, 8/03/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Desired Characteristics of Foster Parents                                                            16.3

G. Motivation                1. The motivation to become foster parents is assessed through the interview
                                process, home visits, TN KEY training interactions and observations.
                             2. Approved foster parents must continue to demonstrate the motivation to
                                achieve a child/youth’s permanency goal and work cooperatively with a
                                child/youth’s birth family and DCS in order to retain their approved status.

H. Parenting Ability          Foster parents should possess personal qualities and skills conducive to good
                              parenting which are demonstrated through training and/or past parenting
                              experiences. Foster parents demonstrate the following characteristics:
                             1. The capacity to integrate a child/youth into the foster family environment with
                                a recognition that the child/youth will likely be suffering debilitating loss and
                                trauma associated with his or her removal from his or her parents and
                                subsequent placement into state custody. The potential foster parent must be
                                able to understand that, typically, a child/youth’s need for state custody is
                                temporary.
                             2. The ability to preserve the continuity of the child’s spiritual, racial, ethnic,
                                and/or cultural identity in a positive manner in conjunction with the following
                                expectations.
                                a) The applicants evaluate their own racial prejudices and ability to cope with
                                   racial inequities.
                                b) They consider other children/youth, extended family, and the community
                                   and the impact this will have on the child/youth.
                                c) They have a plan to integrate the child/youth into this dual heritage
                                   environment while embracing and valuing the child/youth’s racial identity.
                                d) They provide opportunities for the child/youth to participate in cultural
                                   experiences related to his/her ethnic background and interests.
                                e) They have the ability to preserve the cultural identity of the child/youth and
                                   maintain existing family and community relationships.
                             3. The ability to accept and care for a child/youth’s emotional, physical,
                                psychological, and behavioral needs.
                             4. The ability to balance the needs of all of the persons in the home, along with
                                those of the foster, adoptive, and kinship care children.
                             5. The ability to protect a foster child/youth from parental abuse or neglect and
                                support safe interactions or involvement with his/her parents.
                             6. The ability to request, accept, and receive support needed to maintain a
                                child/youth within their family as long as the child/youth remains in state
                                custody.

I. Reasonable and
                             Through thoughtful decision-making, foster parents support the child/youth’s
   Prudent Parenting
                             health, safety and best interest while encouraging the child/youth’s emotional and
                             developmental growth through the following activities: extracurricular, cultural,
                             enrichment and social activities in order to promote “normalcy” and the ability to
                             engage in healthy developmental, appropriate activities that promote well-being

Original Effective Date: DCS 16.3, 07/01/00 and 07/15/02
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                        Page 3 of 5
Supersedes: DCS 16.3, 8/03/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Desired Characteristics of Foster Parents                                                          16.3
                             for all children/youth in care. Refer to the Protocol for Reasonable and Prudent
                             Parenting for additional guidance on activities and opportunities for
                             children/youth in foster care.

J. Ability to Work with      Foster parents possess the ability to effectively work with birth families of any
   Birth Families            child/youth placed in their home by demonstrating the following:
                             1. The ability to accept and support a child/youth’s relationship with his/her birth
                                parent(s), guardian, or other relative filling a parental role.
                             2. The ability to help a child/youth and his/her birth family achieve the goals of
                                the permanency plan through mentoring and coaching and offering support to
                                the child/youth exiting state custody through reunification or adoption.


K. Ability to Partner        Foster parent(s) are willing to work with the Department as demonstrated by their
   with DCS                  ability to:
                             1. Work constructively within the Department’s framework and directly with
                                departmental staff in developing plans to meet the needs of the child/youth
                                and the child/youth’s family.
                             2. Adhere to the departmental policies regarding confidentiality and respect any
                                child/youth or birth family social history information that might be learned or
                                shared with the foster parent.
                             3. Accept and utilize professional consultation including mental health, medical,
                                and educational assistance that will benefit the child/youth in their care.
                             4. Provide input to the Department regarding the needs of a child/youth in care.
                             5. Work in partnership with the Department to make key decisions related to the
                                placement of children/youth and termination of parental rights.
                             6. Work in partnership with the Department to achieve an appropriate and timely
                                permanency for the child/youth.

L. Trauma Reduction          Foster parents must understand the impact of trauma on children/youth and strive
                             to reduce future traumatic events. The Child and Family Team (CFT) attempts to
                             limit separation of siblings and to reduce the movement of children/youth from
                             foster homes by the guidance of DCS Policy and procedures.



Forms:                       CS-0431 Monthly Family Income and Expenditures
                             CS-0678 Foster Parent/Other Adult Medical Report
                             CS-4256, Vaccine Exception Declaration for Foster Parents
                             Note: Contract Agencies may use equivalent forms, provided the content of
                             the forms capture the content of the forms listed above.




Original Effective Date: DCS 16.3, 07/01/00 and 07/15/02
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                        Page 4 of 5
Supersedes: DCS 16.3, 8/03/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Desired Characteristics of Foster Parents                                                         16.3

Collateral                   Protocol for Reasonable and Prudent Parenting
documents:


Glossary:

Term                         Definition

Age or                       As suitable, developmentally appropriate activities for children of a certain age or
Developmentally              maturity level based on the capacities typical for the age group and the individual
Appropriate:                 child.

Normalcy:
                             Collection of age and developmentally appropriate activities, experiences and
                             opportunities that should make up the daily lives of children and youth.

Reasonable and               The standard characterized by careful and sensible parenting decisions that
Prudent Parenting:           maintain the child/youth’s health, safety and best interests.

To Nurture:                   To help (something or someone) grow, develop, or succeed
                              To take care of (someone or something that is growing or developing) by
                               providing food, protection, a place to live, etc.




Original Effective Date: DCS 16.3, 07/01/00 and 07/15/02
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                       Page 5 of 5
Supersedes: DCS 16.3, 8/03/21
CS-0001
RDA SW22
