             State of Tennessee
             Department of Children’s Services


 Administrative Policies and Procedures: 16.8

Subject:            Responsibilities of Approved Foster Homes

Authority:          TCA § 37-5-105(3), 37-5-106, TCA 37-4-201-207; Interstate Compact on the Placement
                    of Children, T.C.A.§ 36-1-115(g)(1); Adoption and Safe Families, P.L. 105-89; Safe and
                    Timely Interstate Placement of Foster Children Act of 2006, P.L. 109-239, and Social
                    Security Act; Fostering Connections To Success and Increasing Adoptions Act of 2008,
                    P.L.100-351;Preventing Sex Trafficking and Strengthening Families Act of 2014 (HR
                    4980)

Standards:          COA: PA-CFS15-16, PA-CFS23.05, PA-CFS 23.10


Application: DCS Foster Care and Supervisory Staff and Contract Agency Staff
Policy Statement:
All approved foster parents, including those involved with the Interstate Compact on the Placement of
Children (ICPC), serve children in their home in accordance with Department of Children’s Services (DCS)
Policies and Procedures.

Purpose:
DCS/Contract agencies ensure that approved foster parents remain capable of providing for the safety,
permanency and well-being of the children placed in their care and continue to serve children in their home
in accordance with DCS Policies and Procedures.

Procedures:
A. Responsibilities of       1. Approved foster parent complies with all DCS policies, procedures, and
   Foster Parents               concepts discussed in TN Knowledge Empowers You (TN KEY) training.
                             2. Approved foster parent will not petition to adopt, obtain guardianship, or file for
                                custody of a child in care of DCS unless the child’s CFT concurs with the plan
                                and gives written approval. Non-compliance with this section may be grounds
                                for closure of a foster home.

                             3. All household rules are clearly communicated to the youth and written down
                                so that any age appropriate child can read and understand. The structured
                                daily household routine provided for the youth may include:
                                       Clear and concise household rules;
                                       Identified acceptable and unacceptable behavior; and
                                       Possible consequences for unacceptable behavior.
                             4. Foster parent ensures proper supervision of children in their care. Decision
                                making regarding participation in outings, overnight stays, and extended travel
Original Effective Date: DCS 16.8, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                       Page 1 of 12
Supersedes: DCS 16.8, 3/31/23
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Responsibilities of Approved Foster Homes                                                        16.8
                                  are made using reasonable and prudent parenting (see Section H) and
                                  guidelines provided in the Protocol for Respite and Other Events. Foster
                                  parents are mindful of the unique needs of children that have experienced
                                  severe trauma, such as child exploitation. Refer to Safety Notice: Creating
                                  Safe Environments for Youth Survivors of Exploitation.
                             5. Foster parent provides notification within one (1) business day to the Foster
                                Parent Support (FPS)/Contract agency staff of any significant changes in the
                                home (i.e., new address, additional persons living in the household, health,
                                income, etc.). Failure to report any significant changes could affect the
                                status of the foster home and may result in termination of foster care
                                board payments and/or an overpayment assessment.
                             6. If a child runs away from the foster home, the foster parent will immediately
                                notify the Family Service Worker (FSW) to ensure the information needed to
                                complete form CS-0705, Absconder Recovery Runaway/Escapee
                                Checklist.
                             7. Foster parent must allow the DCS/Contract agency staff to complete required
                                foster home visits. Refer to the Visitation Guide for visitation requirements.
                                FPS staff visit foster homes to assess safety and well-being of foster parent,
                                children’s well-being and permanency, identifying any Support to Foster
                                Parents Protocol providing support to avoid placement disruption and retain
                                foster homes. Form CS-0709, Foster Home Monthly Visit Checklist should
                                be discussed at each visit and case notes recorded in TFACTS monthly in the
                                foster home record. Contract agencies may use an equivalent form to CS-
                                0709, Foster Home Monthly Visit Checklist for documenting monthly foster
                                home visits.

B. Health Needs              1. The child’s health needs are monitored and arrangements are made to
                                receive routine medical, dental, mental or behavioral treatment after
                                discussing these needs with the FSW or within the context of a Child and
                                Family Team meeting. Appointments are made in accordance with DCS
                                Policies 20.12, Dental Services and 20.7, Early Periodic Screening
                                Diagnosis, and Treatment Standards (EPSDT).
                             2.   In a medical emergency, the foster parents immediately obtain emergency
                                  assistance for the youth and notify the FSW/Contract agency or FPS staff as
                                  soon as possible.
                             3. Foster parent ensures that each child’s nutritional needs are met and are
                                encouraged to provide well-balanced meals. Families are also encouraged to
                                accommodate the child’s cultural norms when planning menus.
                             4. At doctor appointments, foster parent requests that the service provider
                                complete form CS-0689, Health Services Confirmation and Follow-up. If
                                received from the provider, the foster parent gives a copy to the FSW.
                             5. Foster parent follows all doctor orders for each child in their care and make no
                                changes in a child’s treatment unless approved by the physician.
                             6. Foster parent maintains form CS-0630, Foster Home Prescription
                                Medication Record for each child placed in their care and prescribed
                                medication. The medication record is updated on a daily basis or as
                                necessary according to the prescription and provided to the child’s FSW each
                                month. In ICPC cases, a copy of the form CS-0630, Foster Home
Original Effective Date: DCS 16.8, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                     Page 2 of 12
Supersedes: DCS 16.8, 3/31/23
RDA SW22
Subject: Responsibilities of Approved Foster Homes                                                         16.8
                                  Prescription Medication Record becomes part of the Quarterly Progress
                                  report filed by the TN DCS FSW/ ICPC Worker.
                             7. Children who require hospitalization are expected to return to their foster
                                homes once released by medical staff. The foster parents maintain follow-up
                                care as directed by the treating physician.
                             8. All household members (adults and children) must have up-to-date pertussis
                                (whooping cough) and influenza vaccines to foster children under the age of
                                eighteen (18) months old or with significant documented medical needs.
                                Foster parents may request exemption from this requirement on the basis of
                                religious or moral convictions. To request exemption, the foster parent
                                completes CS-4256, Vaccine Exception Declaration for Foster Parents
                                (pending) and provides the document to their Foster Parent Support (FPS)
                                worker or contract agency provider, who ensures the document is scanned
                                into TFACTS in the documents section of the foster parent’s person home
                                page.

                                  Note: Flu season is considered active during the months of October through
                                        March. Therefore, all household members are expected to obtain the
                                        influenza vaccine as close to the beginning of this timeframe as
                                        possible.

C. Clothing and              Adequate clothing, as well as a personal allowance, is to be provided from the
   Allowance                 foster home board payment as outlined in DCS Policy, 16.29, Foster Home
                             Board Rates and the Protocol for Clothing and Allowance.

D. Education                 1. All school-age children:
                                  a) Are enrolled in an accredited school setting;
                                  b) Attend school daily;
                                  c) Have their attendance monitored; and,
                                  d) Have their education needs met in accordance with DCS Policy 21.14,
                                     Serving the Educational Needs of the Child/Youth.
                             2. The biological/legal parent, foster parent, and FSW discuss any problems
                                regarding the child’s schoolwork with school personnel.
                             3. Foster parents are encouraged to attend all multi-disciplinary team (M-Team)
                                meetings, Individual Education Plan (IEP) development meetings as well as
                                other school-related meetings for the children in their care.
                             4. Non-traditional school program enrollment may only be approved as outlined
                                in DCS Policy 21.14, Serving the Educational Needs of the Child/Youth.
                             5. Children in DCS custody who have earned a high school diploma or Hi Set
                                have their vocational and/or post-secondary educational interests addressed
                                in the Independent Living and Transition Planning Guide.
                             6. In ICPC cases, the “sending state” shall continue to have case planning
                                responsibility and financial responsibility for the child’s educational needs. The
                                “receiving state” is not responsible for costs of these services.



Original Effective Date: DCS 16.8, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                      Page 3 of 12
Supersedes: DCS 16.8, 3/31/23
RDA SW22
Subject: Responsibilities of Approved Foster Homes                                                           16.8

E. Discipline                1. Foster parent strives to maintain appropriate discipline of the child by
                                correcting the child’s behavior when necessary and discussing any problems
                                with the FSW in collaboration with FPS staff/Contract agency staff.
                             2. Foster parent and all staff responsible for the care of children in DCS custody,
                                adhere to the guidelines outlined in DCS Policy 19.12, Behavioral
                                Management.
                             3. All consequences are to be age-appropriate and timely. In accordance with
                                DCS form CS-0553, Discipline Policy, the following forms of discipline are
                                not used with children in DCS custody:
                                      Corporal punishment such as slapping, spanking, or hitting with any
                                       object;
                                      Excessive exercising (particularly of a military nature) such as running
                                       laps or repetitive sit-ups;
                                      Cruel and unusual punishment;
                                      Assignment of excessive or inappropriate work;
                                      Denial of meals and daily needs;
                                      Verbal abuse, ridicule or humiliation;
                                      Permitting one child to punish another child;
                                      Chemical or mechanical restraints such as use of psychotropic
                                       medications to subdue a child;
                                      Denial of planned visits, telephone calls or mail contact with birth family,
                                       attorney, siblings, FSW, or pre-adoptive family;
                                      Seclusion as a punishment;
                                      Threat of removal from the foster home.

                              4. In ICPC cases, the discipline policies of both the “sending state” and the
                                 “receiving state” are practiced by the approved foster parent to support the
                                 safety and well-being of the child.

F. Routine                    1. Routine travel is included in the foster home board rate and is an expectation
   Transportation                of a foster parent. At times, frequent transportation may be required for things
                                 such as multiple appointments, alternative school, etc. If an unusual amount
                                 of transportation is required for one particular child, the CFT will discuss the
                                 responsibilities of each team member in assisting with transportation.
                              2. Requests can be made for reimbursement to the foster parent when a child’s
                                 needs require support outside the daily expectations. Refer to the Protocol
                                 for Routine Transportation in regard to the steps for obtaining approval for
                                 situations considered reimbursable.

G. Extra-Curricular          The child’s extracurricular activities are encouraged and monitored. The actions
   Activities                associated with this monitoring and oversight include, but are not limited to, the
                             following:
                              1. The FSW attempts to discuss and obtain the consent of birth parents
                                 when special activities arise for children. Form CS-0559,
Original Effective Date: DCS 16.8, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                        Page 4 of 12
Supersedes: DCS 16.8, 3/31/23
RDA SW22
Subject: Responsibilities of Approved Foster Homes                                                         16.8
                                 Authorization for Release of Child-Specific Information from DCS
                                 and Contract Service Providers is provided to the parents and
                                 completed during these conversations. However, DCS may give
                                 consent or authorize the foster parents to give permission for special
                                 activities.
                              2. Foster parents consider the youth’s age and developmental level and
                                 assist in making developmentally appropriate choices in choosing
                                 extracurricular activities.
                              3. Information regarding a youth’s activities is regularly communicated
                                 with birth family members by the FSW and/or foster parent.
                              4. Refer to DCS Policy 1.15, News Media Relations for DCS Regional
                                 Offices and a Youth Development Center, Section F, items 1-4
                                 regarding interviews or photos of child in DCS custody.

                             Through thoughtful decision-making, foster parents support the child’s health,
H. Reasonable and
                             safety and best interest while encouraging the child’s emotional and
   Prudent Parenting
                             developmental growth through the following activities: extracurricular, cultural,
                             enrichment and social activities. Such activities promote “normalcy” which
                             promotes well-being for all children in care. Refer to the Protocol for
                             Reasonable and Prudent Parenting for additional guidance on activities and
                             opportunities for children in foster care.

I. Religion                  Foster families make accommodations for children to participate in the religion or
                             faith of their choice dependent on the child’s wishes.

J. Case Planning             Foster parent and the CFT are vital partners to the Department. Foster parent
   Participation             consistently participate in case planning by:
                                    Attending and participating as an active member in the CFT process;
                                    Providing input to case decisions and permanency plans; and
                                    Supporting the implementation of those plans.

K. Shared Parenting          Foster parent share planning and caring for children with members of the CFT,
                             including the birth parents, DCS, and contract agencies.
                             1. When parental rights are intact, shared parenting takes place through direct
                                contact with the birth family, unless otherwise indicated by a decision of the
                                CFT.
                             2. Foster parents assist the child’s FSW and actively support the quality visitation
                                plan outlined in the youth’s permanency plan.
                             3. If parental rights have been terminated or surrendered, foster parent
                                acknowledges and respects the child's feelings about the birth family and
                                demonstrates this through their parenting.

L. Life Book                 1. Children in DCS custody have a life storybook to document and preserve their
   Maintenance                  history during the time they are in DCS custody. “Life Books” are constructed
                                and maintained to help children understand their current situation as well as
                                help them process the feelings they may have around significant life events.


Original Effective Date: DCS 16.8, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                      Page 5 of 12
Supersedes: DCS 16.8, 3/31/23
RDA SW22
Subject: Responsibilities of Approved Foster Homes                                                          16.8


                             2. The FSW assists the foster parent in creating and maintaining Life Books for
                                all children placed in their home (refer to Guidelines For Life Story Books).
                             3. The FSW/contract agency staff assists foster parent with access to basic Life
                                Book supplies. Staff consult with their TL regarding the manner in which to
                                acquire these supplies. Each region establishes a process for the
                                procurement of Life Book supplies and ensures that information regarding
                                access to the supplies is communicated to TL.
                             4. The Life Book is the property of the child and travels with the child any time
                                there is a placement change.

M. Mandatory In-        For mandatory in-service training information, refer to Policy 16.9, Required
   Service Training for Foster Parent In-Service Training.
   Foster Parents

N. Foster Home               1. Foster parents are to notify FPS/Contract agency staff of any significant
   Addendum                     changes to their home within one (1) business day. In addition to self-
   Requirements                 reporting, the FPS/Contract agency worker assesses the need for an
                                addendum to the foster home study during each home visit.
                             2. An addendum to the home study is completed within fourteen (14) business
                                days of notice that there has been any significant change in the family (see
                                form CS-0773, Foster Home Addendum). These changes may include, but
                                are not limited to, a change in the number/type of children for which the family
                                is approved, a change in address, or the addition of household
                                members/significant others entering the home. The addendum is approved by
                                the TL/contract agency supervisory staff and entered in TFACTS.
                             3. The following checks are required for a new adult household member who will
                                 reside in the foster home for more than fourteen (14) calendar days:
                                 a) Internet Record Clearance checks are completed the first business day
                                    after the new adult household member entered the foster home. A
                                    complete local criminal background check is initiated the first business day
                                    after the new adult household member entered the foster home and
                                    completed with results within fourteen (14) calendar days. This includes all
                                    adults residing on the foster parent’s property (main residence, detached
                                    apartment, garage, trailers, etc.). This includes a search of all legal
                                    residences within the last six (6) months.
                                 b) A complete local criminal background check is initiated the first business
                                    day after the new adult household member entered the foster home and
                                    completed within fourteen (14) calendar days. This will include all adults
                                    residing on the foster parent’s property (main residence, detached
                                    apartment, garage, trailers, etc.) and a search of all legal residences within
                                    the last six (6) months.

                                 c) DCS Records checks are completed within fourteen (14) calendar days
                                    after the new adult household member entered the foster home.
                                 d) Fingerprinting is arranged within fourteen (14) calendar days after the new
                                    adult household member entered the foster home. Verification of fingerprint
                                    scheduling is provided if the fingerprint result is dated beyond fourteen (14)
Original Effective Date: DCS 16.8, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                       Page 6 of 12
Supersedes: DCS 16.8, 3/31/23
RDA SW22
Subject: Responsibilities of Approved Foster Homes                                                           16.8
                                      calendar days.
                                  Note: Criminal history checks should not be dated more than ninety (90) days
                                        prior to effective move-in date.
                             4. Foster homes that have new adults residing in the home who have not had a
                                criminal history check as outlined in this section may not be paid and run the
                                risk of a possible overpayment assessment.
                             5. All new household members provide a medical report from a licensed
                                physician (refer to DCS Policy 16.4, Foster Home Selection and Approval,
                                Section E, item 6).
                             6. For new household members that become foster co-parents, an addendum to
                                the home study should include all required sections/narratives that apply to a
                                co-parent. Refer to Documentation of the Foster Family Home Study.
                             7. All adult household members or significant others (paramours, fiancés, or
                                partners) that have regular access to the children placed in the home and
                                provide a significant parental role (which may include routine child care,
                                transportation, discipline, or other support to children) must enroll within thirty
                                (30) days of entering the home and complete TN KEY training.
                             Note: Young adults who turn eighteen (18) years old while residing in the foster
                                   home, who have remained a household member since their birthday, do
                                   not apply to this section. They will have background checks completed
                                   during the family’s foster home reassessment.

                             1.     All DCS or contract agency foster homes, are re-assessed no less than
O. Foster Homes Re-
                                    biennially (every two years from the date of initial approval). Approval
   Assessments and
                                    periods remain the same biennially unless extenuating circumstances arise in
   Home Evaluations
                                    which the foster home requires a new approval period. A foster home's
                                    approval period is considered lapsed when the re-assessment due date is not
                                    met. A foster home defaults to an "Unapproved" status if the home remains
                                    unapproved for thirty (30) consecutive days after its re-assessment due date.
                                    Any foster home which remains in "Unapproved" status after thirty (30)
                                    consecutive days is considered inactive effective the 31st day and all new
                                    criminal background checks are to be obtained (refer to DCS Policy 16.4,
                                    Foster Home Selection and Approval, Section J). A foster home’s
                                    approval date will change based on the date that the re-assessment of the
                                    foster home was completed and approved. The home retains an active
                                    eligibility status for two (2) years from the date the home was approved/re-
                                    assessed.

                             2. If the re-assessment due date has lapsed, a paper addendum explaining the
                                reason the approval due date was not met timely is required. The paper
                                addendum is also included with the approval documentation. Team
                                Coordinator and Regional Director signatures are obtained for this document.
                                For contract agency foster homes, equivalent title signatures are obtained.

                             3. Refer to DCS Policy 16.36, Title IV-E Foster Care Funds, to determine the
                                period of eligibility/reimbursability of any foster home or childcare institution.

                             4. Documentation for foster home approval is not dated older than ninety (90) days
                                from the approval due date.

Original Effective Date: DCS 16.8, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                        Page 7 of 12
Supersedes: DCS 16.8, 3/31/23
RDA SW22
Subject: Responsibilities of Approved Foster Homes                                                           16.8

                             5. The reassessment process consists of:
                                  a) A home visit by the FPS or contract agency staff;
                                  b) Completion of form CS-0559, Authorization for Release of Information
                                     and HIPAA Protected Health Information TO or FROM the
                                     Department of Children’s Services and Notification of Release;
                                  c) New background checks must be completed on any adult living in the
                                     home, except young adults who are being served through Extension of
                                     Foster Care (EFC) or young adults who are adjudicated delinquent and
                                     remain in foster care. Results from all background checks are documented
                                     on form CS-0687, Background Check and IV-E Eligibility Checklist.
                                     The required checks for reassessment include those listed in sections e)
                                     and f) below along with a DCS records check.
                                       DCS/contract agency foster parent, and any other adult residing in the
                                        home, will report any arrest indictment or criminal conviction of any
                                        criminal offense (either misdemeanor or felony) immediately to their
                                        FPS/contract agency worker.
                                  d) A local criminal history check for all adult household members.
                                       Any charges identified from this search for which there is no
                                        disposition (misdemeanor or felony) will be clarified by
                                        obtaining additional documentation from the court of
                                        jurisdiction.
                                       If during the course of gathering this information any new
                                        criminal charges are found that require a waiver, refer to CS-
                                        0921, Waiver of Criminal Convictions, Pre and In-Service,
                                        Non-Safety Issues, CPS Substantiations and Education
                                        Requirements.
                                          In situations where there is a pending felony, Central Office is
                                          consulted regarding continued eligibility and viability of the
                                          placement resource.
                                       Misdemeanor convictions, unless related to child safety or
                                        domestic assault or domestic violence, do not require a waiver
                                        (Refer to the Waiver Tip Sheet for Employment,
                                        Volunteering and Custodial Placements). However, such
                                        offenses are considered when assessing safety risk associated
                                        with foster parent responsibility.
                                  e) An Internet Records Clearance, with documentation that includes the
                                     following:
                                        National Sexual Offender Registry
                                        Tennessee Department of Health Abuse Registry Clearance
                                        Each criminal history records check is to be completed in accordance
                                         with policy to ensure timely assessment of foster homes. However, to
                                         allow for human error, it is permissible to rectify errors (i.e. incorrect
                                         name spelling, DOB, SSN) on such checks. Newly conducted checks
                                         that show no results are considered compliant. Checks that show
                                         convictions or substantiations of abuse or neglect within the findings
Original Effective Date: DCS 16.8, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                       Page 8 of 12
Supersedes: DCS 16.8, 3/31/23
RDA SW22
Subject: Responsibilities of Approved Foster Homes                                                             16.8
                                              that would exclude the applicant from becoming an approved foster
                                              home or approved household member as outlined below are deemed
                                              non-compliant.
                                        Any contract agency using an internet service to complete the
                                              required background checks for adult household members is
                                              responsible for assuring that such provider accesses the internet
                                              searches listed above. Doing so will preclude the need for the
                                              provider to complete each individual internet search. Failure to verify
                                              that the chosen internet service uses the exact sites listed above for
                                              each check results in that check being considered invalid. This may
                                              cause a home to be identified as noncompliant and result in monetary
                                              penalties.
                                  f) Verification of a valid driver’s license, current vehicle registration, vehicle
                                     liability insurance, and a Driving Record Check/ Moving Violation Record.
                                     Check for each foster parent or other household member approved to
                                     transport a child is required.
                                  g) Review and completion of form CS-0553, Discipline Policy with new
                                     signature by the foster parent.
                                  h) Review and completion of form CS-0670, Foster Parent Oath to Abide
                                     with new signature by the foster parent.
                                  i)   Review and completion of form CS-0431, Monthly Family Financial
                                       Income and Expenditures and collection of income verification
                                       documentation.
                                 k) An updated medical report, from either six (6) months prior or six (6)
                                    months post re-assessment, using form CS-0678, Foster Parent/Other
                                    Adult Medical Report, is required to be completed by a licensed
                                    physician, nurse practitioner or equivalent health care professional
                                    documenting acceptable physical and emotional health for all foster
                                    parents. All other household members are required to complete form CS-
                                    0707, Medical Self-Report.
                                 l)    When a foster parent or other adult household member has been
                                       prescribed or a change in medication has occurred, form CS-0707,
                                       Medical Self-Report is completed to document the changes. Refer to the
                                       Protocol for Drug and Medication Expectations for Approved Foster
                                       Homes and the Controlled Substance and Medication Work Aid.
                                 m) Completion of forms CS-0676, Home Safety Checklist and CS-0871,
                                    Foster Home Disaster Plan.
                                  n) Completion of form CS-0699, HIPAA Notice of Privacy Practices -
                                     Client Acknowledgement.
                                  o) FPS staff ensures the foster home section of TFACTS is current.
                                  p) Complete form CS-0692, Foster Home Assessment or Re-Activation
                                     with the foster parents. The TL or contract agency supervisor signature
                                     confirms the approval or denial of the assessment. The foster home
                                     disposition information is entered into TFACTS
                                  q) The FPS staff completes a new form CS-0702, Foster Home Approval
                                     for all families who remain in good standing, following their biennial re-

Original Effective Date: DCS 16.8, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                          Page 9 of 12
Supersedes: DCS 16.8, 3/31/23
RDA SW22
Subject: Responsibilities of Approved Foster Homes                                                       16.8
                                      assessment.
                             6. Once the above requirements are met, the approved foster family is permitted
                                to continue to accept placements for kinship care, foster care, or adoption.
                             7. FPS staff complete an anniversary assessment within one (1) month of the
                                approval anniversary during the years the biennial re-assessment is not
                                required.
                                  The anniversary assessment process consist of:
                                     o A home visit by the FPS or contract agency staff;
                                     o Completion of form CS-0676, Home Safety Checklist;
                                     o CS-0559, Authorization for Release of Information and HIPAA
                                      Protected Health Information TO or FROM the Department of
                                      Children’s Services and Notification of Release
                                     o Completion of form CS-0692, Foster Home Assessment or
                                       Reactivation; and
                                     o Completion of a Case Process Review by a supervisor or peer review:
                                       https://stateoftennessee.formstack.com/forms/fh_reassessment_re
                                       view.

                             8. FPS staff documents the anniversary evaluation in the foster home case
                                recording and ensures the foster home record is current.
                             9. A discussion regarding training requirements, updating verification documents
                                (insurance, vaccinations, etc.) and changes in foster family medications are to
                                occur monthly.

P. Case Transfer             During the course of application, home study, or tenure of a DCS foster home,
                             any change of circumstance that triggers a move of that home to another agency,
                             county or region, follows DCS Policy 31.3, Case Transfer Guidelines Between
                             Regions, Agencies, and Facilities.

Q. Resource Eligibility In order to ensure that Federal IV-E safety requirements are met for funding
   Teams (RET)          purposes, the Resource Eligibility Team (RET) reviews the documentation used to
                        support the foster home approval decision. Safety documents for contract agency
                        and DCS foster homes are uploaded in TFACTS and attached to the foster
                        home's current assessment. (Refer to the Protocol for Resource Eligibility
                        Team (RET)).


Forms:                        CS-0431, Monthly Family Income & Expenditures
                              CS-0871, Foster Home Disaster Plan
                              CS-0553, Discipline Policy
                              CS-0630, Foster Home Prescription Medication Record
                              CS-0559, Authorization for Release of Information and HIPAA Protected
                              Health Information TO or FROM the Department of Children’s Services and
                              Notification of Release


Original Effective Date: DCS 16.8, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                   Page 10 of 12
Supersedes: DCS 16.8, 3/31/23
RDA SW22
Subject: Responsibilities of Approved Foster Homes                                                   16.8
                              CS-0676, Home Safety Checklist
                              CS-0670, Foster Parent Oath To Abide
                              CS-0678, Foster Parent/Other Adult Medical Report (if Applicable)
                              CS-0687, Background Check History and IV-E Eligibility Checklist
                              CS-0689, Health Services Confirmation and Follow Up Notification
                              CS-0692, Foster Home Assessment or Re-Activation
                              CS-0699, HIPAA Notice of Privacy Practices - Client Acknowledgement
                              CS-0702, Foster Home Approval
                              CS-0705, Absconder/Runaway/Escapee Recovery Checklist, Part A (if
                              Applicable)
                              CS-0707, Medical Self-Report
                              CS-0709, Foster Home Monthly Visit Checklist
                              CS-0727, Initial Intake, Placement and Well-Being Information and History
                              CS-0773, Foster Home Addendum
                              CS-0871, Foster Home Disaster Plan
                              CS-0909, Foster Home Performance Improvement Plan
                              CS-0921, Waiver of Criminal Convictions, Pre and In-Service, Non-Safety
                              Issues, CPS Substantiations and Education Requirements
                              CS-1012, ADOPTUSKIDS Registration
                              CS-0962, Foster Parent Applicant Questionnaire
                              CS-1000 Foster Parent Elective Training Documentation
                              CS-4256, Vaccine Exception Declaration for Foster Parents
                              FA-0080, Claim for Travel Expenses
                              Note: Contract agencies may use equivalent forms, provided the content of
                                    the forms capture the content of the forms listed above.

Collateral                    16.9, Required Foster Parent In-Service Training
Documents:                    Attachment-Guidelines For Life Story Books
                              Attachment-Guidelines for Foster Care Associations
                              Community Risk Assessment (When Applicable)
                              Documentation of the Foster Family Home Study.
                              Foster Parent Handbook
                              Local Police Check Results
                              Proof of all Reported Income
                              Protocol for Drug and Medication Expectations for Approved Foster Homes
                              Controlled Substance and Medication Work Aid
                              Protocol for Clothing and Allowance
Original Effective Date: DCS 16.8, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                               Page 11 of 12
Supersedes: DCS 16.8, 3/31/23
RDA SW22
Subject: Responsibilities of Approved Foster Homes                                                        16.8
                              Protocol for Re-Activation or Re-Classification of Resource Homes
                              Protocol for Routine Transportation
                              Protocol for Resource Eligibility Team (RET)
                              The Interstate Compact on the Placement of Children Practice and
                              Procedure Manual
                              31.3, Case Transfer Guidelines Between Regions, Agencies, and Facilities
                              Visitation Guide
                              Protocol for Reasonable and Prudent Parenting
                              Attachment Nine: Required Foster Parent Training Chart
                              Protocol for Respite and Other Events
                              Safety Notice: Creating Safe Environments for Youth Survivors of
                              Exploitation
                              Waiver Tip Sheet for Employment, Volunteering and Custodial Placements
                              Support to Foster Parents Protocol

Glossary:
Term                          Definition
Driving Record                Each region has designated specific Foster Parent Support staff who are able to
Check/Moving                  access the Moving Violation Records via an understanding with the Tennessee
Violation Record:             Department of Safety. This access provides DCS with driving records for each
                              individual/ foster parent that provides transportation for DCS children. The report
                              will show speeding and DUI charges and other moving violations. In an attempt to
                              keep DCS children safe while in foster care, these reports are completed during
                              annual re-assessments of foster homes and are also completed prior to
                              approving a new foster home.
Family Service                A DCS term used to identify the position previously known as the DCS Case
Worker:                       Manager or Home County Case Manager. This person is principally responsible
                              for the case and has the primary responsibility of building, preparing, supporting
                              and maintaining the Child and Family Team as the child and family move to
                              permanence.




Original Effective Date: DCS 16.8, 07/01/00
Current Effective Date: 4/11/24                                                                    Page 12 of 12
Supersedes: DCS 16.8, 3/31/23
RDA SW22
