             State of Tennessee
             Department of Children’s Services


 Administrative Policies and Procedures: 14.1

Subject:               Child Abuse Hotline

Authority:             TCA 37-1-102; 37-1-401 et Seq; 37-1-601 et. Seq; 37-5-105 (3); 37-5-106; 37-5-107;
                       37-1-406

Standards:             COA: PS-CFS 4.01-4.03; PA-CFS 4.06


Application:           All Department of Children’s Services (DCS) Child Protective Services (CPS), Child
                       Abuse Hotline (CAH), and Special Investigations Unit (SIU) Employees

Policy Statement:
DCS maintains and operates a CAH, available twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) days per week to
receive reports of alleged child abuse or neglect.

Purpose:
To operate a statewide CAH to manage information regarding reports of abuse and/or neglect by entering
this information on the appropriate screens in TFACTS; screening reports to ensure that concerns of child
safety are effectively identified and assigned a priority response and sending the information to the
appropriate jurisdiction for investigation or assessment.

Procedures:
A. Receiving Reports          1. Reports of harm may be received by email, mail, web, in person and/or by
   at the CAH                    telephone.
                              2. CAH staff is scheduled and available to receive such reports and have
                                 access to a supervisor at all times.

B. Other Calls/Reports CAH staff accepts, documents, and/or redirects calls/reports not related to
   Made to the CAH     allegations of child abuse and neglect in Tennessee to the appropriate entity.
                       Calls/reports may include:
                                   a) Reports of out-of-state abuse and neglect;
                                   b) Courtesy requests from other states;
                                   c) Information only calls;
                                   d) Requests for background checks through the Tennessee Information
                                      Enforcement System (TIES) between 8:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. Central
                                      Standard Time., weekends and holidays, via email; or
                                      EI_DCS_Hotline_Supervisor_Notification@tn.gov.




Original Effective date: 14.1, 04/01/01
Revision date: 12/01/23                                                                            Page 1 of 5
Supersedes: DCS 14.1, 07/11/16
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Child Abuse Hotline                                                                         14.1

C. Receiving the              CAH staff engage the reporter in efforts to obtain pertinent information on child
   Report: Engaging           safety and well-being (refer to Work Aid 2: Child Abuse Hotline for more
   the Reporter               information). CAH staff:
                                   a) Provide general information to reporters about how the report process
                                      operates;
                                   b) Provide information to the reporter regarding the screening notification
                                      process. The reporter may be notified whether the report is screened out
                                      or assigned by e-mail, or the Child Abuse Reporting and Tracking
                                      (CARAT) website;
                                   c) Provide information regarding confidentiality; and
                                   d) Treat callers in a respectful and professional manner.

D. Research of DCS            CAH staff initiates gathering information regarding history of the persons involved
   Information and            to ensure that a comprehensive decision can be made regarding child safety and
   Family History             priority response. Hotline Intake Analyst continue researching history regarding
                              the persons in the intake (Refer to DCS Policy 14.3, Child Protective Services
                              Intake Analyst Responsibilities). Research activities include querying TFACTS
                              for the following:
                                  a) Every known member of the alleged child victim’s (ACV’s) immediate
                                     family/household;
                                   b) All siblings identified in the report;
                                   c) The alleged perpetrator; and
                                   d) Historical information which may include case ID numbers, screen outs,
                                      classifications, and dates of incidents.
                                   e) History searches on death/near death only list information for the last five
                                      (5) years on the household members only.

E. Criteria for CPS
                              CAH staff gather sufficient information to determine whether the report meets
   Involvement
                              minimal criteria for allegations of abuse or neglect (refer to Structured Decision
                              Making (SDM) Child Abuse/Neglect Intake Assessment Tool, Work Aid 2:
                              Child Abuse Hotline, Work Aid 3: Child Abuse Hotline Tasks and
                              Responsibilities for Referrals Concerning a Child Death and Preliminary
                              Near Death for more information). To be accepted for a CPS investigation or
                              assessment, information from the reporter must meet the following criteria:
                               Allegation of harm
                                   The allegation of harm must fall into one of the seven (7) categories for
                                   abuse and neglect in Tennessee as outlined in Work Aid 1: CPS Categories
                                   and Definitions of Child Abuse/Neglect.
                              1. Locating and Identifying the ACV
                                   a)      An accepted report must contain information as to where to locate and
                                          identify the alleged victim, for example:
                                           Name and caregiver’s complete address, including street and
                                            apartment number and city and state;


Original Effective date: 14.1, 04/01/01
Revision date: 12/01/23                                                                                 Page 2 of 5
Supersedes: DCS 14.1, 07/11/16
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Child Abuse Hotline                                                                           14.1
                                           Telephone number;
                                           School name;
                                           Childcare center or babysitter’s name and address;
                                           Hospital name and contact person; or
                                           Collateral name and contact information.
                                   b) If the alleged victim cannot be identified and/or located through the
                                      information gathered from the reporter the report cannot be assigned.
                                   Relationship Criteria:
                              2. Sexual Abuse
                                   a) The report alleges sexual abuse of a child under the age of thirteen (13);
                                      or
                                   b) The report alleges Commercial Sexual Exploitation of a Minor (CSEM) of
                                      a child age thirteen (13) through seventeen (17) and meets the caregiver
                                      definition; or
                                   c) The report alleges sexual abuse that occurred prior to the child turning
                                      thirteen (13) [this applies only to children still under the age of eighteen
                                      (18)]; or
                                   d) The report alleges sexual abuse of a child age thirteen (13) through
                                      seventeen (17) years old whose alleged perpetrator is:
                                           A parent, caregiver, or relative regardless of where the relative lives;
                                           A person(s) living in the home of the child;
                                           An educator, volunteer or employee of an educational/recreational/
                                            organizational setting who is responsible for the care of the alleged
                                            victim; or
                                           May include an individual who is a household member of an
                                            unmarried relative.
                                           An individual providing treatment, care, or supervision for the alleged
                                            victim.
                                   e) Reports alleging sexual abuse when the reporter is unsure about the
                                      identity and relationship of an alleged perpetrator are accepted.
                              3. Other Forms of Abuse and Neglect
                                   a) The report alleges abuse and/or neglect of a child from birth to under
                                      eighteen (18) years of age, at the time of the report (including youth
                                      married prior to their eighteenth (18th) birthday), and the alleged
                                      perpetrator is a parent, caregiver, relative (regardless of where the
                                      relative lives) or person living in the ACV’s home; or
                                   b) The report alleges abuse or neglect to a youth under age nineteen (19)
                                      who has been adjudicated delinquent and is in DCS custody; or
                                   c) The report alleges abuse or neglect to an ACV born alive. DCS does not
                                      have authority to investigate allegations against victims who are stillborn.
                                      However, if the victim is born alive, DCS has authority to investigate

Original Effective date: 14.1, 04/01/01
Revision date: 12/01/23                                                                                    Page 3 of 5
Supersedes: DCS 14.1, 07/11/16
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Child Abuse Hotline                                                                           14.1
                                          allegations of abuse that occurred while the child was in utero.
                                   d) If the report alleges physical or sexual abuse or neglect on children ages
                                      thirteen (13) through seventeen (17) years old, not in DCS custody, and
                                      the alleged perpetrator does not meet the above relationship criteria, the
                                      report is referred to law enforcement by the CAH.
                                   e) All other allegations which do not meet the above criteria are reported to
                                      law enforcement.
                              If no abuse or neglect is determined, but there is a service need noted, the case
                              may be submitted to Resource Linkage.
                              Note: For the purposes of a child in the custody of DCS, a “person living in the
                                   child’s home” includes a person living in a residential setting with the child.




Forms:                  None



Collateral              Work Aid 1: CPS Categories and Definitions of Child Abuse/Neglect
Documents:              Work Aid 2: Child Abuse Hotline
                        Work Aid 3: Child Abuse Hotline Tasks and Responsibilities for Referrals
                        Concerning a Child Death and Preliminary Near Death
                        Structured Decision Making (SDM) Child Abuse/Neglect Intake Assessment Tool


Glossary:
Term                    Definition
Caregiver               Any relative or any other person living, visiting or working in the child’s home or an
                        employee or volunteer at an educational, recreational, medical, religious, therapeutic
                        or other such setting where children are present, or any person in any caretaking role
                        with children, such as a babysitter. A caregiver may also include any person
                        regardless of familial relationship or household membership who has allegedly used
                        the child directly or indirectly for the purpose of commercial sexual exploitation of a
                        minor, such as a trafficker.

Report:                 A report of child abuse or neglect requiring a decision whether or not to initiate a CPS
                        case.

Screened-in             Alleged child abuse/neglect reports received from the community that meets the
reports:                established criteria for a CPS case.
Screened-out     Alleged child abuse/neglect reports received from the community that does not meet
reports:         the stated criteria for CPS involvement. These reports are maintained by DCS and
                 subsequent CPS intakes include a search of the screened out intakes and reports that
                 were accepted for CPS case assignment.
Information Only Calls received to the CAH to gather information which could include; phone numbers,
Calls            questions about the reporting process, or general questions.

Original Effective date: 14.1, 04/01/01
Revision date: 12/01/23                                                                                      Page 4 of 5
Supersedes: DCS 14.1, 07/11/16
CS-0001
RDA SW22
Subject: Child Abuse Hotline                                                            14.1
Courtesy          Requests made by other states for interviews of children or adults, home visits,
Requests          investigative or assessment tasks, or other tasks outlined by a signed border
                  agreement.
Commercial        The use of any person under the age of eighteen (18) as defined in Work Aid 1,
Sexual            Section C: numbers one (1) and two (2)-Child Sexual Abuse- in exchange for anything
Exploitation of a of value either directly or indirectly.
Minor (CSEM)




Original Effective date: 14.1, 04/01/01
Revision date: 12/01/23                                                                    Page 5 of 5
Supersedes: DCS 14.1, 07/11/16
CS-0001
RDA SW22
